But what do we say now, most faithful Donato? I am speaking to you, whom the sting of their spite pricked more than it pricked me, on whom it was inflicted. What, I say, my friend, are we to do? Shall we appeal to fairer judges?
Or shall we keep silent and confirm the sentence by our silence? This is the better course.
Indeed, so that you may know how little I resist, and so that the tenth day need not be waited for, here and now I accept the verdicts of judges of whatever quality; and you, and the others whom the matter touches, who had given contrary verdicts about me,
I beg to give in along with me, and, since you allow it, to let their judgment stand as true. True, I hope, in what they grant me; for in what they take away I freely admit, indeed I declare, that they are right, though I flatly deny that they are competent judges.
Unless perhaps they wish to rely on the rule laid down by their god Aristotle: "each man judges well the things he knows, and of these he is a good judge"; for surely nothing could seem better known than what the judge himself has in abundance,
so that on this pretext the most ignorant of men can pass judgment on ignorance. But it is not so. Judgment about ignorance, and about wisdom, and about anything else, belongs to the wise man: wise, I mean, in the matter he is judging.
The ignorant do not judge ignorance as musicians judge music and grammarians grammar. There are things to have plenty of which is the worst poverty, and which anyone else judges better than the man who has most of them.
No one understands ugliness less than the ugly man, who has grown so familiar with it that he does not see what would wound the eyes of a handsome man.
The same holds for every other defect: no one judges ignorance worse than the ignorant man. I do not say this to escape the court, but so that those who do not know may be ashamed, if any shame is left in them, of having judged.
For on this matter I embrace the verdict not only of friendly envy but of hostile hatred; and in short, whoever pronounces me ignorant agrees with me.
For I too, thinking over how many things I lack of what a mind greedy for knowledge sighs after, acknowledge my own ignorance, in grief and in silence.
But meanwhile, until the end of this present exile comes, in which our imperfection, the partial knowledge we now have, will be finished, I console myself by reckoning up our common nature.
And I suppose this happens to all good and modest minds, that they recognise themselves and console themselves alike; even to those who have come by great learning — I speak by the standard of human learning — which is always small in itself,
and becomes great only in proportion to the narrow vessel that receives it and by comparison with others. Otherwise, how little is it, I ask, however much it is, that any single mind is granted to know?
Indeed, how completely nothing is any man's knowledge, whoever he may be, if it is set beside, I will not say the knowledge of God, but his own ignorance?
And I guess that this knowledge of oneself, and this reckoning of one's own imperfection, and the self-consolation I spoke of, are found chiefly in those who know more and understand more.
Happy in their error are my judges, who have no need of consolation of this kind.
Happy, I say, not through knowledge but through error and an arrogant ignorance: they suppose that nothing is wanting to them of the knowledge of angels, when beyond doubt much of merely human knowledge is wanting to everyone, and all of it to many.
But I come back to myself. And alas, my friend, what evil does a longer life not bring? Whose good fortune was ever so firm that it did not change at some point and grow old, as it were, by living?
Men grow old, fortunes grow old, men's reputations grow old, in the end all human things grow old; and, what I once did not believe, souls at last grow old, immortal though they are, and the saying of the man from Cordoba comes true:
"A longer span destroys great souls." Not that death follows the soul's old age, but that departure from the body and the loosening which we witness and which people commonly call death, and which is indeed the death of the body, not of the soul.
See, my own soul has grown old and cooled. Now as an old man I find out what I said as an inexperienced youth, singing a pastoral: "What does a long life bring a man?" For in what spirit would I have taken this a few years ago? With what struggles would I have resisted?
Believe me, it would have been a heavy war between ignorance and ignorance. Now, to attack an old man is the more disgraceful for being the safer; I lift my hand away, and my ignorance yields to theirs.
