So when the question is about these matters, and about eloquence in particular, I admit that I admire Cicero among, or rather before, all who ever wrote in any nation; and yet I do not imitate him as I admire him, since I labour rather in the other direction,
so as not to be anyone's excessive imitator, afraid of becoming what I do not approve in others. But if to admire Cicero is to be a Ciceronian, then a Ciceronian I am. I do admire him; indeed I marvel at those who do not.
If this can be taken as a fresh confession of ignorance, that is my mind, I admit, and that is my astonishment.
But when it falls to me to think or speak about religion, that is about the highest truth and true happiness and eternal salvation, I am certainly neither a Ciceronian nor a Platonist, but a Christian;
since I seem to myself certain that Cicero would have been a Christian himself, if he had been able either to see Christ or to take in Christ's teaching.
About Plato there is no doubt at all in Augustine that, if he came back to life in our time, or if while he lived he had foreseen what was coming, he would have become a Christian;
and the same writer reports that many Platonists did become Christians in his own day, among whom he must himself be counted.
This foundation standing, how does Ciceronian eloquence stand in the way of Christian teaching? Or what harm is there in touching Cicero's books, when it does no harm, and is even useful, to have read the books of heretics, since the Apostle says:
"There must be heresies, so that those who are approved may be made plain among you"? For the rest, in this department any devout Catholic, however unlearned, will have far more credit with me than Plato himself or Cicero.
These, then, are the stronger proofs of my ignorance; and I am glad, by heaven, that they are true, and I want them to be truer every day.
For certainly, and here I plainly agree with great men, if they heard that any philosopher, however famous, or in the end that their own god Aristotle, had come back to life and become a Christian, they would charge him with crudeness and want of knowledge,
and, ignorant and proud, would look down on the man they had looked up to before, so great is the dearth of truth and the hatred of it, as though he had unlearned everything by the very fact of turning from the murky and talkative ignorance of this world to the wisdom of God the Father.
Nor do I doubt that Victorinus, who while he taught rhetoric was held to be so distinguished that he was granted a statue he had earned in the Roman forum, was, the moment he confessed Christ and the true faith in a clear and saving voice,
held by those proud demon-worshippers to be dull and utterly raving: the men for fear of offending whom, as Augustine reports in his Confessions, he had put off his conversion for a while.
And I suspect the same of Augustine himself, all the more because he was a more distinguished man and his conversion more distinguished, and the more useful and welcome it was to the faithful, the more hateful and grievous to the enemies of Christ and his Church, when at Milan,
as he himself recalls in those same Confessions, he laid down his chair of rhetoric and, under that most faithful and most holy herald of truth Ambrose, seized on heavenly knowledge and the road of salvation,
and from an expositor of Cicero became a preacher of Christ.
I shall tell you what I once heard about him, so that you may understand how great this disease is, how deadly, how deep.
I heard a man of great name reply with a sigh, when I had said something or other about Augustine that pleased me: "Alas, how sad that such a mind should have been caught in empty little tales."
And I said to him: "Wretched you, for saying this, and most wretched if you mean it." He smiled and answered: "A fool, rather, are you, if you believe as you speak; but I hope better things of you."
And what could he hope of me, except that I should be a despiser of piety along with him, in silence?
