Nor do I hide what I have very often said among friends and am now forced to write, well aware that great danger to my reputation hangs over me from it, and that it will be a great and fresh proof of the ignorance charged against me.
I shall write it all the same, and shall not fear men's judgments. Let all the Aristotelians there are anywhere hear me.
You know how readily they will spit on this small foreign book by itself, for they are a breed inclined to abuse; but let the book see to that, and to what cloth it wipes itself with. So long as they do not spit on me, that is enough.
Let all the Aristotelians hear me, I say; and since Greece is deaf to our speech, let those hear who are to be found in all Italy, and in France, and in quarrelsome Paris and the noisy Street of Straw.
I have read all Aristotle's moral books, unless I am mistaken, and heard some of them lectured on; and before this great ignorance of mine was uncovered I used to seem to understand something, and sometimes came back from them more learned, perhaps,
but not, as it should have been, better; and I have often complained to myself and sometimes to others that the promise is not fulfilled which that same philosopher makes at the beginning of the Ethics, namely that this part of philosophy is learned
not that we may know, but that we may become good. I see, of course, that virtue is excellently defined and divided by him, and keenly handled, and the properties of each thing set out, whether of a vice or of a virtue.
When I have learned this I know a little more than I knew; but my mind is the same as it was, my will the same, myself the same. For knowing is one thing and loving another; understanding is one thing and willing another.
He teaches, I do not deny it, what virtue is; but the goads and the torches of words by which the mind is driven and set alight towards love of virtue and hatred of vice, that reading either has not at all, or has very few of.
Whoever looks for them will find them in our own writers, above all in Cicero and Seneca, and, which will surprise some, in Horace, a poet bristly in style but delightful in his sentences.
But what use is it to know what virtue is, if once known it is not loved? What good is knowledge of sin, if what is known is not shuddered at?
Indeed, by heaven, if the will is crooked, the difficulty of the virtues and the seductive easiness of the vices, once they are known, can push a sluggish and wavering mind the worse way.
And it is no wonder that he should be rather sparing in rousing and lifting minds towards virtue, when he mocked Socrates, the father of this philosophy, as "busying himself about moral matters", to use his own phrase, and, if we believe Cicero at all, despised him;
though Cicero despised him no less in return.
But our own writers, as no one who has tried them fails to know, bring the sharpest and most burning stings of speech to the heart and drive them in, by which the slow are pushed forward, the cold set on fire, the sleeping woken, the weak strengthened,
the fallen raised, and those clinging to the ground lifted to the highest thoughts and to honourable desires; so that earthly things begin to look squalid, and vices, once seen, breed a huge hatred of themselves,
and virtue, looked at with inward eyes, and its form, and "the face of the honourable, as it were, seen", as Plato has it, breeds a wonderful love of wisdom and of itself.
Though I am not unaware that none of this can happen at all apart from Christ's teaching and help, and that no one turns out wise or virtuous or good unless he has drunk deep, not from that fabled spring of Pegasus among the slopes of Parnassus,
but from that true and only fountain whose springs are in heaven, of water leaping up into eternal life; and whoever tastes it thirsts no more.
Still, to those making their way towards this, the very writers I named contribute much and help much; many hold this about many of their books, and Augustine in particular gratefully declares it of Cicero's Hortensius from his own experience.
For although our end is not in virtue, where the philosophers placed it, still the straight road to where our end is lies through the virtues: through virtues, I say, not merely known but loved.
These, then, are the true moral philosophers and the useful teachers of the virtues, whose first and last intention is to make the hearer and the reader good,
and who not only teach what virtue or vice is, and din the bright name of the one and the dark name of the other into our ears, but plant in our hearts love and pursuit of the best thing and hatred and avoidance of the worst.
It is safer to work at a good and devout will than at a capacious and clear intellect. For the object of the will, as the wise hold, is goodness; the object of the intellect is truth. And it is better to will the good than to know the true.
For the first is never without merit; the second often carries guilt as well, and has no excuse. So they go far wrong who spend their time on knowing virtue rather than on acquiring it, and much more those who spend it on knowing God rather than on loving him.
For God cannot in this life be known in full by any means, but he can be loved devoutly and ardently; and that love is always happy, while knowledge is sometimes wretched, as it is with the demons, who tremble in hell before the God they know.
