Do you see how I hurry towards the end and never get there? So many things come in between to block the course of the speech.
Not that I fail to know it would have been far wiser and far weightier to have kept silent about this and about much else like it; but it is hard not to be stirred among stings. So I have often had either to crush such fleas or to shake them off.
I should have borne them easily if I had known that you were bearing them easily. In all this it is not my own want of knowledge, which I gladly embrace, but their insolence that I take badly; and, as I said, I should have borne even that in silence had it not been for you.
It is your indignation and not my own that I have humoured with such long talk, writing to you about my ignorance no longer a letter but a book.
I have added what offered itself to me as I hurried about the ignorance of many and of nearly everyone; and if one were given leave to think about these things more carefully, not a slight little book but huge volumes could be woven.
For what, I ask, is commoner than ignorance? What more abundant? What broader? Wherever I turn, I find it in myself and in others, but nowhere more overflowing than in my judges.
If it were as well known to them as it is to me, they would perhaps refrain from delivering verdicts on other men's ignorance, and there would be a perpetual vacation at that most unjust and most absurd tribunal.
For who but the most shameless of men condemns in another what he sees in himself? There is one excuse: they seem learned to themselves, especially at that hour, for it is established that the sentence was delivered after dinner.
At first sight On My Own Ignorance might have seemed an odd title for a book, had I not added something else; but it is not astonishing to anyone who recalls that Antony the triumvir wrote a book about his own drunkenness.
That title is more disgraceful than mine by as much as faults of character are more disgraceful than faults of intellect. Ignorance may come from some laziness or from an inborn slowness; but drunkenness comes from the will and from a crooked mind.
And as Antony there admits himself the drunkest of all men, excepting only, for shame, the son of the great Cicero, so I too do not deny that I am the most ignorant of all men; but I shall except not one man but perhaps four.
But that is enough now, and I fear it is too much; and now, as though out of stormy waves, I have the harbour in sight. So at last let us bear with a high mind this reputation for ignorance, whether it is a false disgrace or a true report.
For no one fears the false but the man who trusts the truth too little, and no one hates the truth but the man who loves what is false. If the disgrace is false it will soon cease, even with the authors of the disgrace themselves, once shame has come over them as they chew over what they said.
With others it will not so much as begin, and will find no learned man's open threshold to turn in at. But if the report is true, why do we shuffle? Are we trying, for love of an empty name, to shake a solid truth?
And what is there in this to torment greatly a noble mind, one that knows human things and sighs after heavenly ones, when it thinks over and measures how very little it is, how close to nothing, that — I will not say one philosopher or another,
even those who have the most distinguished name for learning, but all of them together — know; and how meagre a portion of things the knowledge of all men is, compared either with human ignorance or with divine wisdom.
Here, my friend, you will lend me your ear and your belief, and you will take this as not new, not now first coming to my lips, but often said and more often thought:
take any one of those who stand in great repute for learning, ancient or modern, separate him from that illustrious flock and from the glare of famous names and shake him out carefully, and you will find, if one looks at the truth of things and not at the shouting of men, a little knowledge
and a great deal of ignorance in him; and I persuade myself that they would plainly admit it, if they were here and an honest modesty were not lacking;
and some report that Aristotle groaned this as he died. So let no one flatter himself or grow proud on a reputation for knowledge, but give thanks to God if anything above the common measure has fallen to him.
And let him not be quick to believe even that, and let him believe himself about himself rather than others, and be to himself not a flattering applauder but a censor strict with himself.
For truly, whoever sets aside the favour by which we deceive and are deceived in turn, and looks at his own affairs with open eyes, will find in himself much to weep over and very little to applaud.
But leaving aside the matters where the complaint is heavier, I mean the virtues, let us come back to knowledge. What has a poor man to fear losing, when those held to be richest are truly poor?
For it is within this very scrap of knowable things that we philosophise, swollen with conceit, and quarrel most restlessly, and grow proud as though at the appearance of great learning.
And even the greatest men move about within these same narrows, and, knowing little, are ignorant of much, and are not ignorant that they are ignorant, unless they are mad; and that saying of Cicero's is perfectly true,
that every serious philosopher recognises how much he lacks; and the less a man understands, the less he feels that lack and the less he cares about it. So you will see that the most learned are the most eager to learn, and that ignorance is the most careless of all.
