He put the same thing in another place in almost the same words, in the first book of the Tusculan Disputations: "When we look at these things," he says, "and countless others, can we doubt that someone presides over them, either as their maker, if they came into being,
as Plato thinks, or, if they always existed, as Aristotle holds, as the director of so great a work and so great a charge?"
You see how everywhere he describes one God as the ruler and maker of all things, in a periphrasis that is not merely philosophical but almost Catholic.
So I approve this more than what follows in the book On the Nature of the Gods itself, on Aristotle's authority; for although the thought is the same, there is mention there of gods, whose name is suspect in any inquiry after truth.
For Aristotle puts it splendidly: "Suppose there were someone," he says, "who had always lived under the earth in good and handsome dwellings, decorated with statues and paintings
and furnished with all those things in which people counted happy abound, and who had never come out above the earth, but had heard by report and hearsay that there is a certain divine power and force of gods; and then, at some point, the jaws of the earth being opened,
he had been able to get out from those hidden dwellings into these places we inhabit, and to come forth: when he had suddenly seen the earth and the seas and the sky,
and had learned the vastness of the clouds and the force of the winds, and had looked at the sun and come to know both its size and its beauty and also its power, in that it makes day by spreading light through the whole sky; and when night had darkened the lands,
he would then see the whole sky marked out and adorned with stars, and the changing light of the moon as it waxes and wanes, and the risings and settings of all of them, and their fixed and unchangeable courses through all eternity;
and when he saw these things he would certainly judge both that there are gods and that these great things are the works of gods." So much for him, Aristotle that is.
And because that example might seem too outlandish and remote from experience, Cicero brings forward a real and not an invented case, and one within recent memory:
"Let us," he says, "imagine a darkness as great as that which the eruption of the fires of Etna is said once to have brought over the neighbouring districts, so that for two days no man could recognise another; and when on the third day the sun shone out,
they seemed to themselves to have come back to life. But if the same thing happened to us from outside, so that we suddenly caught sight of the light, what a spectacle the sky would seem!
But by daily repetition and the habit of the eyes our minds grow used to things, and they neither wonder at nor look for the causes of what they always see,
just as if novelty rather than the greatness of things ought to rouse us to search out causes.
For who would call that man human who, when he has seen the motions of the sky so sure, the orders of the stars so fixed, and everything so connected and fitted together, says that there is no reason in them and that they come about by chance: things carried on with such design
that by no exertion of ours can we follow it?
When we see something moved by a mechanism, such as a globe, or a clock, or a great many other things, we do not doubt that these are the works of reason;
and yet when we see the drive of the heavens moving and turning with wonderful speed, most constantly completing the yearly changes, with the greatest benefit to everything, do we doubt that this is done not only by reason,
but by a reason that is excellent and divine? For it is possible, setting aside the subtleties of argument, to contemplate with the eyes, in a manner, the beauty of those things which we say were established by divine providence."
You hear, my friend, what I said in advance: this is not a philosopher speaking but an apostle.
For what else does all this, and each part of it, seem to you to sound like, but that apostolic passage to the Romans: "For God has shown it to them; for the invisible things of him are seen from the creation of the world, being understood through the things that are made,
and his everlasting power also and divinity, so that they are without excuse; because when they had known God they did not glorify him as God or give thanks, but became empty in their thoughts."
What else, I ask, does Cicero mean, by repeating so often that the world was established by divine providence and is governed by divine providence, and by pressing it on men's eyes as though with the hand of his tongue, except that, once the author and maker of things is known,
men of ability should be ashamed to be turned away from the spring of true happiness and to be spun about through the by-ways of opinion by empty and barren thoughts? You might well wonder, if you did not know me, that I can hardly tear myself away from Cicero: so much does that mind delight me.
Look how I have now been carried by a certain not unfamiliar sweetness of matter and style further than I usually go, so as to stuff my little works with another man's; and I beg the patience not so much of you as of the reader. As long as I seemed to have something of my own, I clothed myself out of my own stock.
A merchant destitute of letters, robbed by these four plunderers of learning and reputation, I have nothing of my own left; and if I beg from others, poverty excuses the intrusion and the shamelessness. And what poverty, do you think?
Ignorance is a great poverty of the mind, and none is greater except vice.
