And although things wholly unknown are not loved, it is enough, for those to whom no more is granted, to know God and virtue this far: that we should know him to be the fountain of every good, most bright, most sweet to the taste, most delightful, inexhaustible,
from whom and through whom and in whom we are whatever good we are; and to know virtue as the best of things after God.
And knowing this, let us love and worship him with our whole heart and marrow for his own sake, and virtue for his sake: him the sole author of life, and virtue life's chief ornament.
This being so, it is perhaps not blameworthy, as my judges think, to believe these philosophers of ours, even if they are not Greeks, especially about virtue.
And if, following either these writers or perhaps my own judgment, I have said something, even though Aristotle said it otherwise or said something else, I am not on that account disgraced before fairer judges of the matter.
For Aristotle's practice is well known, as Chalcidius set it out on Plato's Timaeus: "This man, in a way of his own, having chosen from a full and finished doctrine what he pleases, neglects the rest with a disdainful carelessness."
If, then, I have said something he disdained or neglected, or perhaps never thought of — for that can happen, and it is not out of keeping with human nature, though, if we follow these men, it is not in keeping with the man's reputation — if I have said this,
whatever it is, for I do not really know what it is, and they do not attack me straightforwardly with true and definite charges, but with suspicions and whispers, is that a sufficient reason for me to be plunged under the waves of ignorance,
so that, going wrong in one thing, in which, since it is they who are wrong, I may not be wrong at all, I am made guilty of everything, and must be condemned as always wrong in everything and as knowing nothing of anything?
"What then?" someone will say. "Are you too muttering against Aristotle?"
Nothing against Aristotle, but something for the truth, which, ignorant as I am, I love; and much against the foolish Aristotelians who cram Aristotle into every word every day, though they know him by name alone, to the disgust, I imagine, of the man himself
and of their hearers, and who rashly twist even his straight sentences into a crooked meaning. No one loves illustrious men more than I do, and no one reveres them more; and, as Ovid says, "as many poets as were there, I thought so many gods were there."
I extend that to philosophers and above all to true theologians. As for Aristotle himself — I should not be saying this if I did not know him to be a very great man — I know he was very great, but, as I said, a man.
I know that much can be learned in his books, but I believe that something can be known outside them as well; and I do not doubt that, before Aristotle wrote, before he learned, before he was born, some men knew much:
Homer, Hesiod, Pythagoras, Anaxagoras, Democritus, Diogenes, Solon, Socrates, and the prince of philosophy, Plato.
"And who," they will say, "gives Plato this first place?" To answer for myself: not I, but the truth, which, as they say, if he did not grasp it, he at least saw, and approached more nearly than the rest.
Then great authorities give it him: Cicero first, and Virgil, not by naming him but by following him, and besides them Pliny, and Plotinus, Apuleius, Macrobius, Porphyry, Censorinus, Josephus, and among our own writers Ambrose,
Augustine and Jerome, and many others. This could easily be proved, if it were not known to everyone.
