Nor again does it escape me how much Aristotle was in the habit of arguing against Plato in his books; how honourably and how far from any suspicion of envy he does it, though somewhere he declares Plato a friend but truth a greater friend,
let him see to that, and let him hear this said to him at the same time: it is easy to quarrel with a dead man.
Yet many very great men defended Plato after his death, particularly on the Ideas, against which that keenest of debaters had strained all the sinews of his intellect; and Augustine's own defence of them is well known and confident,
and I should think a devout reader would agree with him no less than with either Aristotle or Plato.
Let me say one thing here in passing, to refute the error of my judges and of others like them, who, treading in the footsteps of the crowd, are in the habit of supposing, and of objecting insolently and no less ignorantly, that Aristotle wrote much.
And in this they are not wrong: he did without doubt write much, more even than they suppose, since some of it the Latin language does not yet possess.
But Plato, wholly unknown and unseen by them, they assert wrote nothing except one or two small books; which they would not say if they were as learned as they proclaim me unlearned.
I, neither lettered nor Greek, have at home sixteen books of Plato or more, of which I doubt whether these men have ever heard the name of a single one. So they will be astonished if they hear this. If they do not believe it, let them come and see.
My library, which I left in your hands, is not itself unlettered, though it belongs to an unlettered man; and it is not unknown to them;
they have gone into it so often to put me to the test; let them go in once to test Plato as well, and see whether he too is famous without letters. They will find it is as I say, and will admit, I think, that I am ignorant but not a liar.
And these most lettered men will look at some not only in Greek but turned into Latin, which they have never seen elsewhere.
About the quality of the works let them judge by their own right; but about the number, these most quarrelsome of men will not dare either to judge otherwise than I say or to quarrel.
And what a small fraction of Plato's books that is. I have seen many of them with these eyes, particularly in the hands of Barlaam the Calabrian, the modern pattern of Greek wisdom,
who set about teaching me, ignorant of Latin as I am, the letters of the Greeks, and might perhaps have got somewhere, had death not grudged him to me and blocked an honourable beginning, as it usually does.
I am wandering too far now in pursuit of my ignorance, and indulging my mind and my pen too much. I must go back. These, then, my friend, and others like them, are the causes that have exposed me to the friendly but, strange to say, unjust judgment of my companions.
Of these, as I understand it, none is stronger than this: that, sinner though I am, I am certainly a Christian. Though I might perhaps have to hear what Jerome reports was thrown at him: "You are lying; you are a Ciceronian, not a Christian.
For where your treasure is, there is your heart also." I shall answer that my treasure is incorruptible and that the highest part of my heart is with Christ.
But because of the weaknesses and the burdens of mortal life, which are hard not only to bear but even to count, I cannot, I admit, lift up as I would the lower parts of the soul, in which the irascible and concupiscible appetites lie,
so that they still cling to the earth.
And how often and with what effort I have tried again and again, in sorrow and indignation, to tear them from the ground, and what I suffer from it because I have not succeeded, only Christ knows, whom I call to witness and on whom I call;
and he may perhaps have mercy and help the wholesome effort of a weak soul buried and pressed down under the weight of sin. Meanwhile I do not deny that I am given over to many empty and harmful concerns.
But among them I do not count Cicero, who I have found never harmed me and often did me good.
No one will be surprised to hear me say this, if he has heard Augustine declaring the same of himself; on which I remember treating just above, but at greater length elsewhere, and so I shall be content to have said this one thing now.
I do not conceal that I take delight in Cicero's mind and eloquence, in which, to say nothing of countless others, I see that Jerome himself took such delight that neither that terrible vision nor the wrangling of Rufinus moved his pen so far away from it
as to stop it smelling of something Ciceronian. Feeling this himself, he excuses himself somewhere on this very point.
And Cicero, read faithfully and moderately, harmed neither him nor anyone else, since he has done everyone great good for eloquence and many great good for life; in particular, as we said, Augustine, who, on the point of coming out of Egypt,
filled his fold and his lap with the gold and silver of the Egyptians; and, destined to be so great a champion of the Church and so great a defender of the faith, long before he went down into the line he armed himself all round with the enemy's weapons.
