What am I to say about the others, who assert not the innumerability of worlds and the infinity of places, like the two just mentioned, but the eternity of this world?
Towards that opinion nearly all the philosophers lean, apart from Plato and the Platonists, and my judges along with them, so as to seem philosophers rather than Christians;
and in order to defend that most famous, or infamous, little verse of Persius, "nothing can be born from nothing, nothing can return into nothing", they do not shrink from attacking not only Plato's fashioning of the world in the Timaeus but the Genesis of Moses, and the Catholic faith,
and the whole teaching of Christ, most holy and most healthful and flowing with heavenly honey, unless they are frightened off by human rather than by divine punishment.
When that fear ceases, and the witnesses are cleared away, they attack truth and piety, secretly mocking Christ in corners and adoring Aristotle, whom they do not understand; and they accuse me, because I do not bend my knees along with them,
putting down to ignorance what belongs to faith.
Being afraid to charge the faith itself, they harass the followers of the faith and call them dull and ignorant; and they attend not to what others know or do not know, but to where they agree or disagree with themselves;
and with them all disagreement counts as ignorance, whereas to disagree with people in error is the height of wisdom.
And they press their case so far that, since it is impossible in nature for something to come out of nothing, they ascribe this incapacity to God himself: blind and deaf, since they will not so much as listen to Pythagoras, the oldest of the natural philosophers,
who maintains that it is the power and might of God alone that what nature cannot bring about God easily can, being mightier and more excellent than every power, and the one from whom nature herself borrows her strength.
I am not surprised if they do not listen to Christ, or the apostles, or the Catholic doctors, whom they despise: what surprises me is that they do not listen to this philosopher, or that they scorn him.
And yet one may not suppose that such great judges of other men have not read this; but if by chance they have not, let them read it, if any shame is left in them, in Chalcidius, in the second commentary on Plato's Timaeus. But I advise them in vain.
Everything that tends to piety, said by whomever, they despise with equal rashness and impiety; and in order to seem learned they rave, supposing that what is denied to a humble maidservant is forbidden to the almighty master as well.
Moreover, as you may have noticed in their commotions, when it comes to public disputation, since they do not dare to belch out their errors, they usually declare that for the present they are arguing with faith set aside and laid by;
and what, I ask, is that but to look for the truth with truth thrown out, and, as it were, to abandon the sun and go down into the deepest and darkest chasms of the earth in order to find light there in the dark? Nothing more insane could be imagined.
And they themselves, in case you think they do nothing, or do not know what they are doing, deny the faith by a covert declaration, since they dare not do it by an open profession, now with serious and sophistical blasphemies, now with playful and ill-seasoned ones,
and with jokes that stink and are impious.
And Balbus, speaking in Cicero to the great approval of his hearers, says: "It is a bad and impious habit to argue against the gods, whether one does it in earnest or in pretence." He was speaking devoutly, as a worshipper of gods,
though that piety was itself impious and pestilent. How bad, then, and how impious a habit ought it to seem to worshippers of the true God, to argue against their God, that is against the one, true, living God of heaven, with whatever intention?
For if it is done in earnest, it is a huge crime and impiety; and if in play, it is a most senseless game and deserves the censor's mark.
