There are also those lodging houses and boltholes of invention: seeing that what was said about Jupiter did not suit God, the philosophers count two Jupiters, one natural and the other of legend, as Lactantius says, or rather three Jupiters, as Cicero says,
and those who count them are called theologians: theologians of gods, I mean, not of one God. How much force these devices have and how highly they are to be valued, whoever looks, so that I do not stray too far from my subject, in Lactantius of Formiae
will find in the first book of his Institutes.
For it is tiresome even to have touched on their saying that there are five suns, and as many Mercuries, as many Dionysuses and as many Minervas, and four Vulcans, four Apollos, four Venuses, three Aesculapiuses, three Cupids, three Dianas,
six Herculeses, as Cicero says, or, according to Varro, forty-three. And they are not ashamed to say what we are ashamed to hear, let alone to believe. For I ask, who would not be sickened by such silliness? Who could put up with such circumlocutions?
Everything is so full and so crammed, not merely with errors but with empty dreams, that at times I pity, and resent, that noble eloquence being laid out and used up on such concerns. As for the rest, let them do as they like.
But what a piece of quackery this is, what a game, what fairy tales: to make five suns, when they want the sun to be called sun because it shines alone, and when it stands recorded among portents that there were never really several of them, but that they were sometimes seen so, perhaps through a defect of the eyes
or through a panic of the mind.
With all respect to the ancients, and to Cicero before the rest, I judge that these things should not have been written, and I should judge that they ought not to be read — things on the writing of which so great a man laboured — except that, once read and understood, the trifles about the gods might stir in readers' minds a love of true divinity and of the one God, and a contempt for foreign superstition, and a reverence for our religion.
For nothing is known more clearly than when it is set beside its opposite; nothing makes light more lovable than hatred of the dark.
And if I have said this about my own Cicero, whom in many things I admire, what do you expect me to say about the others?
Many have written much subtly, and some weightily, sweetly, eloquently; but into it, like poison in honey, they have mixed things false, dangerous and ridiculous, which it would take too long and be beside the point to deal with now.
Nor shall I have in all their cases the excuse I had in Cicero's: not all of them draw one in like that, since, however lofty their matter, they have no comparable sweetness of speech.
Often the same song has been delightful or tiresome according to the differences between singers, and the voice makes the same music seem quite different.
But so that the point does not lack an example: who does not know that Pythagoras was a man of the highest ability? Yet his is that notorious METEMPSYCHOSIS, which I am astonished beyond belief could ever have climbed into the head, I will not say of a philosopher, but of a human being.
Climb it did, and having set out from a great mind it infected great minds too, so they say.
I would say something here if I dared; and since I do not dare, a bolder man will say it for me: Lactantius of Formiae, who in the books of the Institutes did not scruple to call this same Pythagoras we are speaking of an empty and silly old man,
and a thoroughly frivolous person whose vanity deserves derision, and who despises and refutes this whole fabulous and empty lie, and above all his falsehood that in an earlier life he had been Euphorbus,
with a noble freedom of style and of mind.
And this is the choicest of the Pythagorean doctrines, by which that man, a stranger among the credulous people of Metapontum, where he died, earned so great a name that his house was treated as a temple and he himself was worshipped and held to be a god.
And although he did not write these things himself, for he is reported to have written nothing, he did say them, and after him others wrote them. Who has not heard of the swarms of atoms and their chance collisions?
Democritus wants heaven and earth and the universe to be composed of these as they come together into one, and Epicurus after him; and, so that nothing at all should be missing from the madness, they posited innumerable worlds.
On hearing which, Alexander of Macedon is said to have sighed that he had not yet subdued one out of the innumerable. The sigh of an empty and enormous mind.
Certainly these two founders of this philosophical sect had not yet come to know a thousandth part of one world, while they were dreaming of innumerable worlds.
Go now, and deny that they were not only learned but sober and judicious, and, what is plainest of all, deny that they had time on their hands, since they were at leisure to think up such things.
