But far be it from me to take in the whole of any man's mind on the strength of one or two things well said; for I have learned, from Cicero himself and indeed from inborn reason, that philosophers are to be judged not by single utterances but by their continuity and consistency.
Who is so uncouth that he does not sometimes say something agreeable? But is that enough? Often one utterance covers much ignorance for a time; often the brightness of the eyes or golden hair veils ugly blemishes of the body.
A man who wants to praise the whole safely must see the whole, examine the whole, weigh the whole. It may be that next to what pleases there lies hidden something else which offends as much or even far more.
See how the same Cicero, in the same place where he had argued so weightily and so like a devout man, soon returns to his gods as a dog to its vomit; and having run through their names and their several attributes, and being about to deal now not with the providence of one god but of gods, listen,
I beg you, to what he slips in: "These gods," he says, "we ought both to reverence and to worship. And the best worship of the gods, and the purest, and the fullest of piety, is that we should always reverence them with a mind and a voice that are clean, whole and uncorrupted."
Alas, my Cicero, what are you saying? Do you so quickly forget the one God, and yourself? Where is that excellent and surpassing nature, and that divine power of a surpassing mind?
Where is the god better than man, and the maker of those things which cannot be brought about by human reason or power, the heavenly things, and of this everlasting order which we see?
Where, in short, have you left that dweller in the heavenly and divine house, and its ruler and director besides, and the architect, so to speak, of so great a work? You have driven him, as it were, out of that starry house which you had granted him in so welcome a confession,
by giving him companions so foul and so unworthy: companions he rejects, proclaiming through the prophet's mouth, "See that I am alone, and there is no other god besides me."
Who then are these new and recent and disreputable gods whom you try to push into the house of the Lord? Are they those of whom another prophet says, "All the gods of the nations are demons, but the Lord made the heavens"?
A moment ago you were speaking to me of this maker and creator of the heavens and of all things, and were rightly delighting the ears and the mind of a devout listener: and so suddenly you have mixed him up with rebel creatures and unclean spirits?
With one word you have overturned everything you seemed to have said wisely and soberly. But why do I say one word? Many, rather: for often, indeed everywhere, you slip back into the same track with a stumbling step, as though half asleep, and you worship the gods you had just been mocking.
You even make the sun and the moon and the stars, and at last this palpable world itself, which we see and touch and tread on, endowed with sense, alive, and, than which nothing is more foolish, a god.
And though you assign this not to yourself but to Balbus speaking in your pages, which was itself a piece of Academic caution, at the end of that book you did not dare, for fear of offending against the law of the Academy, to call Balbus' argument the truer, and called it the more probable,
so that by approving whatever he had argued you seem to have made it your own; and it is truly your own, since, following the Platonic custom, you preferred to assign it to another and to put out your own opinions through another's invented mouth.
Although in one place in that work the same Balbus does seem to bring forward a single god with many names, a shield of errors which the Stoics are in the habit of using to excuse the madnesses of the crowd of gods,
as though they meant that by different words only one thing is designated and understood: so that, for example, there is one god, called Ceres on land, Neptune on the sea, Jupiter in the upper air, Vulcan in fire.
Yet how frivolous this excuse and this sketch of the truth is, who does not see, if, to say nothing of the rest, he has read in the pagan writers of the precedence of the gods among themselves, and their quarrels and wars, and the diversity of their rites?
For the true God, who cannot but be one, is nowhere greater or less than himself, since he is always and everywhere the same; nor can he ever be, or have been, at odds with himself; nor is he pleased now with a sheep and now with a bull,
but always with one sacrifice, of praise and righteousness and a broken spirit and tears. He is one in heaven and on earth; his substance is one in both; his name is one.
