But so as not to squeeze those three books into this one little volume, I shall copy out nothing more of Cicero today, although both often elsewhere and there especially he touched on a great many things in careful and most laborious argument, and to this very end:
that from all the things we see we should conclude that there is a God, the maker and ruler of all.
For this is more or less the sum of that argument: when almost everything in the heavens and on earth has been set out, the spheres of the sky and the stars, then the stability and fruitfulness of the lands,
the conveniences of sea and rivers, the variety of seasons and winds, and also grasses and plants and trees and living creatures, the marvellous natures of birds and four-footed beasts and fishes, and the manifold usefulness of all these: food,
labour, transport, and remedies for diseases, and hunting and fowling, and architecture, and navigation, and countless arts, and everything discovered either by intelligence or by nature,
and finally the marvellous framework and arrangement of bodies and senses and limbs, and last of all reason and industry, in unfolding which he works with great care and eloquence, so much so that I do not know
whether any writer ever handled these matters so painstakingly and so keenly, the conclusion is always one: that everything we see with our eyes or grasp with our intellect
was made by God for the good of men, and is governed by divine providence and design.
Indeed, coming down even to particular cases, after naming fourteen distinguished Roman commanders, unless I am mistaken, he added: "Of whom we must believe that not one was what he was without the help of God."
And a little later: "No man," he says, "was ever great without some divine inspiration." And what should a devout man understand by that inspiration except the Holy Spirit?
And so, apart from the eloquence, which no man ever matched, what would any Catholic writer change here in the substance?
What then? Am I to enrol Cicero among the Catholics on this account? I wish I could. And how I wish it were allowed. If only he who gave him such a mind had also offered himself to be known, as he offered himself to be sought.
For though the true God has no need of our praises or of mortal eloquence, we should even so now have in our churches, I think, proclamations of our God which would not be truer,
nor holier — that cannot happen and ought not to be hoped for — but perhaps sweeter and more resounding.
