But who could bear what follows? "What construction was it," he says, "what tools? What levers? What machines? Who were the workmen for so great a task? And how could air, fire, water and earth obey and submit to the architect's will?"
The question of a mistrustful and irreligious mind. For he asks as though about a carpenter or a blacksmith, not about him of whom it is written, "He spoke, and they were made."
And he spoke not with a word that flies away, in case they dream that he laboured even in commanding, as they often do, but through the inward Word coeternal with himself, which was in the beginning with God: true God from true God, of one substance with the Father,
through whom all things were made. He certainly made the world out of nothing; or, if the world was made, as some philosophers hold, out of formless matter, which some Greeks call hyle and others silva,
that matter itself, as Augustine says, was made out of absolutely nothing. God, then, made the world by that Word which Epicurus and his followers could not know, but which our own philosophers do not deign to know; and that makes them less excusable than those ancients.
Even a lynx may fail to see in the dark; but a man who does not see in daylight with his eyes open is plainly blind.
But the question raised later in Cicero, how a man who has presented the world as born or made can say that it will be everlasting, is not unfairly raised.
We, however, say that the world both had a beginning and will have an end.
The question that follows is emptier, but common enough: "I ask," he says, "why the builders of the world, suddenly roused, slept through innumerable ages before."
Those who ask this do not consider that if this world had been made a hundred thousand years ago, or, since this too stands written in Cicero, that the Babylonians count four hundred and seventy thousand years, before all these thousands or many more,
the same question could equally be asked, why not earlier; since a thousand thousands of years, set against the infinite, are no more than the same number of days, as the psalmist says: "For a thousand years before your eyes are as yesterday, which is past";
or much less even than that, or, to speak more truly, nothing at all.
For between one day, or one hour, and a thousand years or a thousand thousand years, as between a single tiny drop fallen in a light shower and the whole Ocean and all the seas, there is some comparison, very small indeed, and some proportion.
But between many years, as many thousands as you like, until number runs out of names, and eternity itself there is none at all. For those quantities, beyond measure though they are, are very great on one side and small on the other, and on both sides certainly finite.
But these, on the contrary, are infinite on one side and finite on the other, however vast; and set beside the infinite they are to be reckoned not small but nothing, as that great man Augustine says, who argues this very point most forcibly in the twelfth book of the City of God.
And this is the perplexity which forced the philosophers to posit the eternity of the world, so that God should not seem to have been idle for so long.
Summing up the view of many in a few words, Theodosius Macrobius, in the second commentary on the sixth book of Cicero's Republic, says: "Philosophy holds that the world has always existed, with God indeed as its founder, but not from a point in time;
since time could not exist before the world, because nothing makes times except the course of the sun." This is nevertheless demolished in Cicero himself, in these words: "For it does not follow that if there was no world there were no ages.
By ages I do not now mean those which are made up by the number of days and nights in yearly courses, for I admit that these could not come about without the turning of the world.
But there was a kind of eternity from infinite time, which no marking-off of times measured. Yet what its extent was can be understood from this, that it does not even fall within thought that there should have been some time when there was none."
Augustine inserts these words there almost as they stand.
Men more clever than devout do indeed add, to the eternity we have spoken of, the various changes brought upon the world by burnings and floods of the lands, by which it may seem both temporal and in a way new, although it is eternal.
