But my judges do not look at this; in their court I should not seem so ignorant if I were not a Christian. For how could a Christian seem a lettered man to people who call Christ, our master and lord, a know-nothing?
The pupil of an uneducated master will not easily become learned, so long as he does not turn aside from his master's footsteps.
So eagerly and boldly and offensively they shout against the teacher and against his pupils, indeed they bark and jeer, and they glory in nothing so much as in having said something confused and tangled, understood neither by themselves nor by anyone else.
For who, I ask, is to understand a man who does not understand himself?
Nor do they listen to Caesar Augustus, a most articulate ruler among his many gifts of mind and character, who, as is written of him, followed an elegant and restrained style of speech,
and made it his chief care to express his meaning as plainly as possible; who mocked friends who went hunting for unusual and obscure words, and rebuked an enemy as a madman for writing things that his hearers would wonder at rather than understand.
Truly then they are extraordinary men, who go fowling for a reputation for learning from the very thing which earns them among the learned the disgrace of ignorance. For clarity is the highest proof of intelligence and knowledge.
For what a man understands clearly he can say clearly, and what he holds within his own mind he can pour over into his hearer's mind.
So what Aristotle says in the first book of the Metaphysics turns out true, Aristotle whom these men love and do not understand: the mark of one who knows is that he can teach.
Although this itself is not without its craft, since, as Cicero says in the second book On the Laws, "not only is knowing something a matter of art, but there is also an art of teaching." Yet that art is undoubtedly founded on clarity of understanding and knowledge.
For although an art of this kind is required over and above knowledge, in order to express and to stamp the mind's conceptions, still no art will bring clear speech out of an obscure mind.
But our friends look down on us from a height, we who enjoy the light and do not grope about with them in the dark, as though we distrusted our own knowledge and were therefore ignorant of everything, because we do not argue about everything at the street corners; and they swell with unheard-of circumlocutions,
pleased with themselves above all because, knowing nothing, they have learned to profess everything and to shout about everything.
And no shame draws them back from this, nor modesty, nor awareness of the ignorance they are hiding; nor, I will not say that line from the mime of Publius, "through over-long contention the truth is lost", but the authentic word of Solomon:
"There are very many words, and much emptiness in disputing"; or that of the Apostle: "But if anyone seems to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor has the church of God"; and this of the same man:
"See that no one deceives you through philosophy and empty deceit, after the tradition of men, after the elements of the world, and not after Christ."
But what am I saying? How can I hope that they will ever believe Paul? Is he not Christ's disciple, and the dearer to his master, the more hateful and despicable to these men? Who ever lent an ear to an adviser he hated?
They will not be quiet, not if a friend, not if Aristotle himself pulled at the reins: so great is the drive, so great the rashness of mind, so great the swelling, so great and so empty the boasting in the name of philosophy, so great in the end the obstinacy of their opinions,
and the shamelessness of their foreign doctrines and windy argument. Among the many damnable things in it is the one set down above, that they want the world to be coeternal with God.
Here I have been used to hearing, not without serious disgust, those profane little songs which these friends of ours sing everywhere at the crossroads; and in Cicero, Velleius, the defender of Epicurus' party, asks in these words:
"With what eyes of the mind," he says, "was Plato able to gaze on that fashioning of so great a work, by which he makes the world to be constructed and built by a god?"
This question can be put up with, more or less, except that in the asking it has already been answered: with what eyes did Plato see this? With the eyes of the mind, of course, by which invisible things are perceived, and on which, as a philosopher relying on the keenest and clearest of them,
he saw much; though our own people have come nearer to this vision, not by keener sight but by a clearer light.
