In the name of gods and men!
So then, in their judgment no one can be lettered unless he is at the same time a heretic and a madman, and above all a nuisance and a boor, who, arguing through the lanes and squares of the cities about four-footed beasts and brutes, is himself a two-footed brute.
And what wonder if my friends judge me raving and not merely ignorant, since they are beyond doubt of that flock which despises piety cultivated by any mind at all, and sets religion down to want of confidence,
and thinks no man clever or learned enough unless he dares to say something against God and to argue something against the Catholic faith, while being dumb only where Aristotle is concerned?
The more spiritedly a man presumes to attack that faith, for it can be stormed by no intellect and no force, the cleverer and more learned he is in their eyes;
and the more confidently and faithfully he defends it, the duller and less learned he is held to be, and he is thought to have taken up the veil of faith, in the knowledge of his own ignorance, to cover and wrap himself in;
exactly as though their own doctrines were not discordant and nervous little tales and empty trifles, and not certain knowledge about doubtful or unknown matters but vague and loose and uncertain opinions;
whereas the knowledge of the true faith is the highest and the most certain and, in the end, the happiest of all the sciences. Abandon it, and all the rest are not roads but by-ways, not destinations but collapses, not sciences but errors.
Such, however, are their minds and their judgments that I wonder whether not only those two men spoken of above, or any like them, but Paul himself, the greatest of all, did not, I will not say begin to displease the Jews, whom he had pleased before,
as Jerome says, expounding his letter to the Galatians, but seem altogether mad, both to the Pharisees and to the high priests, for having become from a wolf a lamb, and from a persecutor of the Christian name an apostle of Christ;
and whether he does not seem so to these friends of ours even now. So I can console myself for the ignorance charged against me, as I could for madness if that were charged, with great company; and this is what I do.
Indeed at times I take pleasure and delight in standing accused, on honourable grounds, not merely of ignorance but of insanity.
For the rest, I am glad about myself and grieved about my friends. For although other causes, and perhaps slighter ones, are put forward for the verdict, these ones are not free of crime and impiety: deadly and disgraceful for them, glorious even for me, so that for such causes I should be ready to be stripped not only of reputation
but of life as well, should it come to that, with the most level mind.
What torments me above all is that the truest cause of this crooked judgment, whether the only one or the one standing out among all, is spite, which has always infected many eyes, but never any that were sound and clear, and has forced them to see what is false.
It is an astonishing and unheard-of thing, never known to me before and now, against my will, tried and learned on my own head: that envy should live in friendly breasts. Friendly, I say, but without a full and complete friendship, which is to love a friend as oneself.
These men love me, but not with the whole heart. I shall put it better: they love with the whole heart, but not the whole of me.
My life certainly, and my body and soul, and whatever I have except my reputation, and that only my reputation in letters, I would put confidently and without hesitation into the hands of all of them or of any one of them.
And this exception belongs neither to hatred nor to a slacker friendship, but to envy, which, as I said, lives even inside friendships; or, if that is hard to hear, this too may be better put another way: that the exception belongs not to spite but to pain.
They are pained, perhaps — indeed they certainly are — that among the learned, among whom they hear that I have won the name of a lettered man, truly or falsely, they are neither lettered nor known. Hence they want taken from me what they do not have and, if they are wise, do not hope for.
It is a great clash of wishes and a discord in the facts, to want every good, even the greatest, for a man, and to grudge him even the smallest: not so much, I think, because they resent my having it, as because they are pained at its being wanting to them.
They seek, and not unjustly, I admit, to be equals in friendship, and they work at this: that since we cannot all be famous, we should all be obscure, which they reckon easier. Equality among friends is, I do not deny it, a most beautiful thing.
For where one side notably outweighs the other, the minds of friends seem ill put under the yoke of friendship, like ill-matched bullocks. But that equality ought to be one of love and loyalty; not so of fortunes and fame.
And this is proved, to say nothing of the obscure, by the inequality between Hercules and Philoctetes, Theseus and Pirithous, Achilles and Patroclus, Scipio and Laelius.
Still, let them see for themselves, as they please, in what spirit they have stood towards my name; towards me, unless I am mistaken, their spirit is beyond doubt the best.
