I think I am not unpracticed in what you are asking about.
For in fact the other day I happened to be going up to town from my home in Phalerum;
so one of my acquaintances, catching sight of me from behind at a distance, called out, and joking as he called, said, "Man of Phalerum! You there, Apollodorus, won't you wait?"
And I stopped and waited.
And he said, "Apollodorus, why, I was looking for you just the other day, wanting to learn all about the gathering of Agathon and Socrates and Alcibiades and the others who were present then at the dinner — about the speeches on love, what they were;
for someone else was recounting them to me, having heard them from Phoenix the son of Philip, and he said that you knew them too.
But in fact he had nothing clear to say.
So you recount them to me;
for you are the most rightful person to report your companion's words."
"But first," he said, "tell me: were you yourself present at this gathering or not?"
And I said, "It really does seem that your narrator recounted nothing clear at all, if you suppose that this gathering you are asking about took place recently, so that I too could have been present."
"I did indeed," he said.
"How could you, Glaucon?" said I.
"Don't you know that for many years now Agathon has not been in town, and that it is not yet three years since I began spending my time with Socrates and made it my daily care to know whatever he says or does?
Before that, running around wherever chance took me and thinking I was accomplishing something, I was more wretched than anyone — no less than you now, thinking one ought to do anything rather than philosophize."
And he said, "Don't mock me, but tell me when this gathering took place."
And I said, "When we were still boys, when Agathon won with his first tragedy, on the day after he and his chorus-members offered the victory sacrifice."
"A very long time ago, then, it seems," he said.
"But who recounted it to you?
Socrates himself?"
"No, by Zeus," said I, "but the same man who told Phoenix.
It was a certain Aristodemus, of the deme Cydathenaeum, a small man, always barefoot;
he had been present at the gathering, being a lover of Socrates among the foremost of those of that time, as it seems to me.
Not but that I have also already asked Socrates about some of the things I heard from him, and he confirmed them just as that man recounted."
"Why then," he said, "won't you recount it to me?
In any case the road into town is well suited for talking and listening as we go."
So as we went along together we made our talk about these things, and thus, as I said at the beginning, I am not unpracticed.
If then I must recount it to you as well, that is what I must do.
For indeed, for my own part, whenever I either make speeches about philosophy myself or hear them from others, quite apart from thinking that I am benefited, I rejoice beyond measure;
but when I hear certain other kinds of talk — above all your kind, that of the rich and the money-makers — I am vexed myself and I pity you, my companions, because you think you are accomplishing something when you are accomplishing nothing.
And perhaps you in turn consider me an unfortunate wretch, and I think you think truly;
I, however, do not merely think it of you — I know it well.
You are always the same, Apollodorus;
for you are always speaking ill of yourself and of everyone else, and you seem to me simply to consider everyone miserable except Socrates, beginning with yourself.
And from where you ever got this nickname of being called "the soft one," I for one do not know;
for in your talk you are always like this — you rage against yourself and everyone else except Socrates.
My dearest friend, and is it so obvious, then, that in thinking this way about myself and about you I am mad and out of my wits?
It is not worth quarrelling about this now, Apollodorus;
but do what we were begging of you — don't do otherwise, but recount what the speeches were.
Well then, they were something like this — but rather, I shall try to recount it all to you from the beginning, just as that man recounted it.
For he said that Socrates fell in with him, fresh from the bath and with his slippers on — things that man seldom did;
and that he asked him where he was going, now that he had made himself so beautiful.
And that he said, "To dinner at Agathon's.
For yesterday I escaped him at the victory celebration, fearing the crowd;
but I agreed to be present today.
So that is why I have beautified myself like this — so that beautiful I may go to a beautiful man's house."
"But you," he said, "how do you feel about being willing to go uninvited to dinner?"
"And I," he said, "answered, 'Just as you bid me.'"
Follow me, then, he said, and let us corrupt the proverb by changing it, so that it runs: 'to Agathon's feasts the good go uninvited.'
For Homer, it seems, not only corrupted this proverb but even did violence to it;
for having made Agamemnon an exceptionally good man in matters of war, and Menelaus a 'soft spearman', he made Menelaus come uninvited to the feast when Agamemnon was sacrificing and entertaining — the worse man coming to the feast of the better.
On hearing this, he said, Aristodemus replied: Perhaps, though, I too shall run a risk — not as you put it, Socrates, but as Homer has it — of going uninvited, a paltry man, to the feast of a wise one.
So consider, as you bring me along, what defence you will offer, since I for my part will not admit to having come uninvited, but will say I was invited by you.
'When two go together,' he said, 'along the way' we shall plan what we will say.
Well, let us go.
After some such conversation, he said, they set off.
Now Socrates, turning his mind somehow in upon himself, fell behind as they went along the road, and when Aristodemus waited for him, he told him to go on ahead.
And when he arrived at Agathon's house, he found the door open, and there, he said, something rather comical happened to him.
For at once one of the slaves from inside met him and led him to where the others were reclining, and he found them just about to dine;
and anyway, the moment Agathon saw him, he said: Aristodemus, you have come at a fine moment to dine with us;
but if you came for some other reason, put it off to another time — for yesterday I was looking for you to invite you, and could not find you.
But how is it you are not bringing us Socrates?
And I, he said, turning round, saw Socrates nowhere following;
so I said that I had in fact come with Socrates, invited by him here to dinner.
And a fine thing you did, he said;
but where is the man?
He was coming in behind me just now;
I am wondering myself where he might be.
Boy, said Agathon, go and look, won't you, and bring Socrates in?
And you, Aristodemus, he said, recline beside Eryximachus.
And he said the slave washed him so that he could recline;
and another of the slaves came in announcing: this Socrates of yours has withdrawn and is standing in the neighbours' porch, and though I call him he refuses to come in.
That is a strange thing you are telling us, he said;
go and call him, won't you, and don't let him go.
But he — that is, Aristodemus — said: By no means; leave him alone.
For this is a sort of habit of his;
sometimes he goes off and stands wherever he happens to be.
He will come presently, I think.
So do not disturb him, but leave him be.
Well, we must do as you say, if that is your view, he said Agathon said.
But you, boys, serve the feast to the rest of us.
Set before us absolutely whatever you please, whenever no one is standing over you — a thing I have never yet done — so now, imagining that I too have been invited to dinner by you, along with these others here, wait on us, so that we may praise you.
After this, he said, they began to dine, but Socrates did not come in.
So Agathon repeatedly ordered that Socrates be sent for, but he — Aristodemus — would not allow it.
Then Socrates arrived, having lingered not long, as his habit was, when they were at most halfway through dinner.
So Agathon — for he happened to be reclining alone at the far end — said: Here, Socrates, recline beside me, so that by touching you I may enjoy the piece of wisdom that came to you in the porch.
For clearly you found it and have it;
otherwise you would not have come away.
And Socrates sat down and said: It would be a fine thing, Agathon, if wisdom were the sort of thing that flows from the fuller of us into the emptier when we touch one another, like the water in cups that flows through a strand of wool from the fuller cup into the emptier.
For if wisdom too is like that, I set a high price on the place beside you;
for I expect to be filled from you with wisdom in great quantity and of great beauty.
My own would be a poor sort of thing, or even questionable, like a dream, but yours is brilliant and holds great promise — wisdom which, young as you are, shone out from you so intensely and became manifest the day before yesterday before more than thirty thousand Greeks as witnesses.
You are an outrageous man, Socrates, said Agathon.
And a little later you and I will go to law about this wisdom, taking Dionysus as our judge;
but for now, first turn to your dinner.
After this, he said, when Socrates had reclined and dined, and the others too, they made libations, and having sung to the god and done the other customary things, they turned to the drinking;
So Pausanias, he said, began a discussion along some such lines as this.
Well then, gentlemen, he said, in what way shall we drink most easily?
I tell you, for my part, that in truth I am in a very bad way from yesterday's drinking and I need some relief— and I think most of you do too;
for you were there yesterday— so consider in what way we might drink as easily as possible.
Then Aristophanes said, Now that is well said, Pausanias, that we should by every means contrive some easing of the drinking;
for I myself am one of those who got soaked yesterday.
So when he heard them, he said, Eryximachus the son of Acumenus said, Indeed you speak well.
And I still need to hear from one more of you how he stands as to strength for drinking— from Agathon.
Not at all, he said, I have no strength for it myself either.
It would be a godsend for us, said he, as it seems— for me and Aristodemus and Phaedrus and these here— if you, the most capable drinkers, have now given up;
for we are always incapable.
Socrates I except from the account;
for he is equal to both, so that whichever we do will content him.
Since, then, it seems to me that no one of those present is eager to drink much wine, perhaps I should be less disagreeable if I spoke the truth about drunkenness, what sort of thing it is.
For to me at any rate I think this has become quite clear from the art of medicine, that drunkenness is a hard thing for men;
and I would neither be willing myself, so far as I could help it, to drink deep, nor would I advise it for another, especially one still suffering a hangover from the day before.
Well now, he said that Phaedrus of Myrrhinus broke in and said, I for one am accustomed to obey you, especially in whatever you say about medicine;
and now, if they take good counsel, so will the rest.
On hearing this they all agreed not to make the present gathering a matter of drunkenness, but to drink just so, for pleasure.
Since, then, said Eryximachus, this has been resolved, that each is to drink as much as he wishes, and that there is to be no compulsion, I next propose that we let the flute-girl who just came in go her way— let her play to herself, or, if she likes, to the women within— and that we spend our time together today through talk;
and through what sort of talk, if you wish, I am willing to propose to you.
They all said that they did indeed wish it and bade him propose.
So Eryximachus said that the beginning of my speech is after the manner of the Melanippe of Euripides:
for not mine is the tale, but it belongs to Phaedrus here, which I am about to tell.
For Phaedrus is forever saying to me in indignation, Is it not a terrible thing, Eryximachus, he says, that for certain other gods there are hymns and paeans composed by the poets, but for Eros, so ancient and so great a god, not even one of all the many poets there have been has ever composed any encomium?
And if again you care to consider the worthy sophists, they write up praises of Heracles and others in prose, like the excellent Prodicus— and that is less to be wondered at, but I myself once came upon a book by a wise man in which salt received a marvellous praise for its usefulness, and you would see plenty of other such things eulogised— that men should have taken such great pains over things of that sort, while no human being to this very day has yet dared to hymn Eros worthily;
so utterly neglected is so great a god.
Now in this Phaedrus seems to me to speak well.
I therefore desire at once to bring my contribution and gratify him, and at the same time it seems to me fitting on the present occasion for us who are here to adorn the god.
If, then, you agree as well, we should find sufficient pastime in speeches;
for it seems to me that each of us ought, going round to the right, to deliver a speech in praise of Eros, the finest he can, and that Phaedrus should begin first, since he both lies in the first place and is at the same time the father of the argument.
No one, Eryximachus, said Socrates, will vote against you.
For neither, I suppose, could I refuse, who claim to know nothing else but the things of love, nor, I suppose, could Agathon and Pausanias, nor indeed Aristophanes, whose whole occupation is with Dionysus and Aphrodite, nor any other of these whom I see.
And yet it does not come out equal for us who lie in the last places;
but if those before us speak sufficiently and well, that will content us.
Well then, with good luck let Phaedrus begin and eulogise Eros.
To this, then, all the others too assented and bade him do just as Socrates said.
Now of everything that each man said, neither did Aristodemus remember it all very well, nor again do I remember everything that he told me;
but the things that struck me most, and the speakers whose words seemed to me worth remembering— of these I will tell you each one's speech.
