Most certainly.
What—and if a thing is not wise, is it therefore ignorant?
Or have you not perceived that there is something between wisdom and ignorance?
What is that?
To judge rightly without being able to give an account of it—do you not know, she said, that this is neither knowing—for how could a thing without an account be knowledge?
—nor ignorance—for how could that which hits upon what is be ignorance?
—and right opinion is surely something of just this sort, between understanding and ignorance.
What you say, said I, is true.
Then do not compel what is not beautiful to be ugly, nor what is not good to be bad.
So too with Eros: since you yourself agree that he is neither good nor beautiful, do not suppose any the more that he must be ugly and bad, but something, she said, between these two.
And yet, said I, it is agreed on all sides that he is a great god.
By all who do not know, she said, do you mean, or by those who know as well?
By absolutely everyone.
And she laughed and said, And how, Socrates, could he be agreed to be a great god by those who say he is not even a god at all?
Who are these?
said I.
You are one, she said, and I am another.
And I said, How, said I, can you mean that?
And she said, Easily.
For tell me: do you not say that all the gods are happy and beautiful?
Or would you dare to say that any one of the gods is not beautiful and happy?
By Zeus, not I, I said.
And by the happy you mean those who possess the good and beautiful things, do you not?
Certainly.
But you have agreed that Eros, from want of good and beautiful things, desires those very things of which he is in want.
I have agreed, yes.
How then could he be a god, he who is without portion in the beautiful and the good?
In no way, as it seems.
Do you see, then, she said, that you too hold Eros to be no god?
What then, said I, would Eros be?
A mortal?
Anything but that.
But what, then?
As in the previous cases, she said, between mortal and immortal.
And what is that, Diotima?
A great daimon, Socrates;
for indeed all that is daimonic is between god and mortal.
Having what power? said I.
Interpreting and ferrying across to gods what comes from men, and to men what comes from gods—from the one side their prayers and sacrifices, from the other their commands and the requitals of the sacrifices—and being in the middle it fills up the space between both, so that the whole is bound together with itself.
Through this daimonic power moves all divination, and the art of the priests concerning sacrifices and initiations and incantations, and all soothsaying and sorcery.
God does not mingle with man; but through this comes all the intercourse and converse of gods with men, both waking and asleep;
and the man who is wise in such matters is a daimonic man, while he who is wise in anything else, in some art or handicraft, is a mere mechanic.
These daimones, then, are many and of every kind, and one of them is Eros.
And of what father, said I, is he born, and of what mother?
That is rather long, she said, to recount;
but still I will tell you.
For when Aphrodite was born, the gods held a feast—the others, and among them Poros, Resource, the son of Metis.
And when they had dined, Penia, Poverty, came begging—as one does when there is good cheer—and hung about the doors.
So Poros, drunk on the nectar— for wine did not yet exist— went into the garden of Zeus and, heavy with drink, fell asleep.
Then Penia, scheming because of her own resourcelessness to get herself a child from Poros, lay down beside him and conceived Eros.
And this is why Eros has become Aphrodite's follower and attendant: he was begotten on her birthday, and at the same time he is by nature a lover concerned with the beautiful, and Aphrodite is beautiful.
So, being the son of Poros and Penia, Eros is settled in a fortune of this kind.
First, he is always poor, and far from being soft and beautiful, as the many suppose, he is hard and parched and barefoot and homeless, always lying on the ground without bedding, sleeping in doorways and by roads under the open sky, having his mother's nature, always housemate to need.
But then, after his father, he is a schemer against the beautiful and the good, being courageous and headlong and intense, a formidable hunter, always weaving some devices, a desirer of practical wisdom and resourceful, philosophizing through all his life, a formidable wizard and sorcerer and sophist;
and by nature he is neither immortal nor mortal, but at one moment of the same day he blooms and lives, whenever he finds resource, and at another he dies, and comes back to life again through his father's nature, while what is procured is always flowing away, so that Eros is never either without resource or rich, and again he is in the middle between wisdom and ignorance.
For it stands thus.
No god philosophizes or desires to become wise— for he is— nor, if anyone else is wise, does he philosophize.
Nor again do the ignorant philosophize or desire to become wise;
for this is precisely what is hard about ignorance, that one who is not beautiful-and-good, nor sensible, seems to himself to be sufficient.
So he who does not think himself in need does not desire what he does not think he lacks.
Who then, Diotima, I said, are those who philosophize, if neither the wise nor the ignorant?
That much, she said, is by now clear even to a child: those between these two, among whom Eros too would be.
For wisdom is indeed among the most beautiful things, and Eros is love concerned with the beautiful, so that Eros is necessarily a philosopher, and being a philosopher he is between wise and ignorant.
And of this too his birth is the cause;
for he is of a father wise and resourceful, and of a mother not wise and resourceless.
This then, dear Socrates, is the nature of the daimon;
but as for the one you thought Eros to be, it is nothing surprising that you were so affected.
You thought— as it seems to me, judging from what you say— that the beloved is Eros, not that which loves;
for this reason, I think, Eros appeared to you all-beautiful.
For it is indeed the lovable that is really beautiful and delicate and perfect and to be counted blessed;
but that which loves has another form, of the kind I have described.
And I said, Well then, stranger, you speak beautifully;
but if Eros is such, what use is he to human beings?
That is just what I shall try to teach you next, Socrates, she said.
Eros, then, is of this kind and has come to be in this way, and he is of beautiful things, as you say.
But if someone should ask us:
In what respect is Eros love of beautiful things, Socrates and Diotima?
Or, more clearly, thus:
he who loves loves beautiful things:
what does he love?
And I said, that they come to be his.
But the answer, she said, still longs for a further question of this kind:
what will he have, the man to whom the beautiful things come to be?
I said that I was not at all able any longer to answer this question readily.
Well, she said, suppose someone changed the terms, using the good instead of the beautiful, and inquired:
come, Socrates, he who loves loves good things:
what does he love?
That they come to be his, said I.
And what will he have, the man to whom the good things come to be?
This, said I, I can answer more resourcefully: he will be happy.
Yes, she said, for it is by acquiring good things that the happy are happy, and there is no further need to ask, And for what purpose does he who wishes to be happy so wish?
The answer seems, rather, to be complete.
You speak the truth, said I.
Now this wish and this love— do you suppose it is common to all human beings, and that all wish good things to be theirs always, or how do you mean?
Thus, said I:
that it is common to all.
Why is it then, Socrates, she said, that we do not say all men love, if indeed all love the same things, and always, but instead we say that some love and others do not?
I wonder at that myself, said I.
Well, do not wonder, she said;
for as it turns out, we single out one form of love and give it the name of the whole, calling it love, while for the other forms we use other names.
Like what?
said I.
Like this.
You know that poetry — making — is something manifold;
for the cause of anything whatever passing from not-being into being is all of it making, so that the productions carried out under all the arts are makings, and the craftsmen of them are all makers — poets.
What you say is true.
But all the same, said she, you know that they are not called poets but have other names, and that out of the whole of making one portion has been marked off — the portion concerned with music and metres — and is addressed by the name of the whole.
For this alone is called poetry, and those who possess this portion of making are called poets.
What you say is true, I said.
So it is, then, with love as well.
In its main sum it is all desire of good things and of being happy — love at its greatest and most beguiling, in everyone;
but those who turn towards it along many other paths — by way of money-making, or love of exercise, or philosophy — are neither said to love nor called lovers, while those who go after one particular form of it and are in earnest about it get the name of the whole: love, and loving, and lovers.
You may well be speaking the truth, said I.
And indeed a certain story is told, she said, that those who seek their own other half are the ones who love;
but my account says that love is neither of a half nor of a whole, unless, my friend, that half or whole happens somehow to be good — seeing that men are willing to have even their own feet and hands cut off, if their own parts seem to them to be diseased.
For it is not what is their own, I think, that men each cleave to, unless one calls the good one's own and one's very self, and the bad alien;
since there is nothing else that men love but the good.
Or do you think there is?
By Zeus, not I, said I.
Is it then so simple, said she, to say that men love the good?
Yes, I said.
But what?
Must we not add, she said, that they love the good to be their own?
We must add that.
And then, she said, not only to be their own, but to be their own for ever?
That too must be added.
In sum, then, said she, love is of the good's being one's own for ever.
What you say, said I, is most true.
Since love, then, is always this, said she, in what manner of pursuing it, and in what activity, would the eagerness and the straining be called love?
What is this work, in fact?
Can you say?
If I could, Diotima, said I, I should hardly be marvelling at you for your wisdom and coming to you to learn these very things.
Well then, she said, I will tell you.
It is begetting in the beautiful, both in respect of the body and in respect of the soul.
It would take divination, said I, to tell what on earth you mean, and I do not understand.
Well, said she, I will speak more plainly.
All human beings, Socrates, she said, are pregnant both in body and in soul, and when we come to a certain age our nature desires to give birth.
But it cannot give birth in what is ugly, only in the beautiful.
For the coming-together of man and woman is a begetting.
And this is a divine affair, and this — conception and generation — is the immortal element within the living creature, mortal though it is.
But these things cannot come to pass in what is inharmonious.
And the ugly is out of harmony with everything divine, while the beautiful is in harmony with it.
Beauty, then, is the Fate and the Eileithyia who presides over birth.
For this reason, whenever the pregnant being draws near to something beautiful, it grows gracious and, gladdened, melts and flows over, and gives birth and begets;
But when it draws near to what is ugly, it contracts, gloomy and grieving, and turns away and curls in upon itself and does not beget, but holds back its offspring and bears it painfully.
Hence in the one who is pregnant and already swelling there arises this great fluttering about the beautiful, because the beautiful releases its possessor from great birth-pangs.
For love, Socrates, she said, is not of the beautiful, as you suppose.
But of what, then?
Of begetting and giving birth in the beautiful.
Very well, said I.
It certainly is, she said.
Why then of begetting?
Because begetting is what is everlasting and immortal, so far as that can be for a mortal.
And from what we have agreed, one must necessarily desire immortality together with the good, if indeed love is of the good's being one's own forever.
It follows of necessity from this argument, then, that love is also of immortality.
All this, then, she used to teach me whenever she made her discourses on erotic matters, and once she asked: What do you think, Socrates, is the cause of this love and this desire?
Or do you not perceive how terribly all the beasts are affected whenever they desire to procreate, footed and winged alike, all of them sick and erotically disposed, first about coupling with one another, then about the rearing of what is born; and how they are ready even to do battle for these, the weakest against the strongest, and to die for them, and to be racked with hunger themselves so as to rear their young, and to do anything else whatever?
Human beings, she said, one might suppose do these things from calculation;
but as for the beasts, what cause makes them so erotically disposed?
Can you say?
And I again said that I did not know;
and she said, Do you really think, then, that you will ever become formidable in erotic matters, if you do not understand these things?
But it is for this very reason, Diotima, as I said just now, that I have come to you, knowing that I need teachers.
Come, tell me the cause of these things and of all the rest that concerns erotic matters.
Well then, she said, if you believe that love is by nature love of that which we have often agreed upon, do not wonder.
For here, on the same reasoning as there, mortal nature seeks so far as it can to exist forever and to be immortal.
And it can do so only in this way, by generation, in that it always leaves behind another new thing in place of the old; since even in the time in which each single living creature is said to live and to be the same — as a man is called the same person from boyhood until he becomes an old man —
yet this man, though he never has the same things in himself, is nevertheless called the same, but is always becoming new while losing other things, in his hair and flesh and bones and blood and his whole body.
And not only in his body, but in his soul as well: his ways, his characters, opinions, desires, pleasures, pains, fears — none of these is ever the same in each of us, but some come to be and others perish.
And far stranger still than these is that our pieces of knowledge too — not only do some come to be and others perish in us, so that not even in respect of our knowledge are we ever the same, but each single piece of knowledge suffers the same fate.
For what is called practising exists because knowledge goes out of us;
forgetting is the departure of knowledge, and practice, by implanting a fresh memory in place of the one that is departing, preserves the knowledge, so that it seems to be the same.
For it is in this way that everything mortal is preserved — not by being absolutely the same forever, like the divine, but by what departs and grows old leaving behind another new thing such as it itself was.
By this device, Socrates, she said, the mortal partakes of immortality, both body and everything else;
but the immortal does so in another way.
So do not wonder that everything by nature honours its own offshoot;
for it is for the sake of immortality that this zeal and this love attend upon every creature.
And I, when I heard her speech, wondered at it and said: Very well, said I, most wise Diotima, is this truly how things really are?
And she, just like the accomplished sophists: Know it well, Socrates, she said;
since indeed, among human beings too, if you are willing to look at their love of honour, you would wonder at the irrationality of it in regard to what I have spoken of, unless you reflect and bear in mind how terribly they are affected by love of becoming famous and of laying up immortal glory for all time to come — and for the sake of this they are ready to run every risk, even more than for their children, and to spend money and endure toils of any kind whatever and to die for it.
For do you suppose, she said, that Alcestis would have died for Admetus, or Achilles would have died after Patroclus, or your own Codrus would have died before his time for the sake of his sons' kingship, if they had not thought that there would be an immortal memory of their virtue — the memory we now hold?
Far from it, she said; rather, I think, it is for the sake of immortal virtue and glorious fame of that kind that all men do all things, and the better they are, the more so;
for it is the immortal they love.
Those, then, who are pregnant in their bodies, she said, turn rather to women and are lovers in that way, providing for themselves, as they suppose, through the begetting of children, immortality and memory and happiness for all time to come;
but those pregnant in their souls — for there are indeed, she said, those who conceive in their souls still more than in their bodies the things it befits a soul to conceive and to bring forth —
what, then, befits it?
Wisdom and the rest of virtue — of which, indeed, all the poets are begetters, and those of the craftsmen who are said to be inventive;
but far the greatest and most beautiful part of wisdom, she said, is that which concerns the right ordering of cities and households, whose name is temperance and justice — and when someone is pregnant in soul with these from his youth, being unwed, and, his prime having come, now desires to give birth and beget, then he too, I think, goes about seeking the beautiful in which he might beget;
for in the ugly he will never beget.
So, being pregnant, he welcomes beautiful bodies rather than ugly ones, and if he meets with a soul that is beautiful and noble and well-endowed, he welcomes the two together with all his heart, and towards this person he is at once well supplied with speeches about virtue, and about what sort of man the good man ought to be and what he should pursue, and he undertakes to educate him.
For by touching the beautiful one, I think, and consorting with him, he brings to birth and begets what he has long been pregnant with, remembering him both present and absent, and together with him he joins in rearing what has been begotten; so that such men enjoy with one another a much greater partnership than the partnership of children, and a firmer friendship, inasmuch as they have shared in children more beautiful and more immortal.
And everyone would choose to have such children born to him rather than the human kind, looking to Homer and Hesiod and the other good poets, and envying them the sort of offspring they leave behind — offspring which, being themselves of such a kind, furnish their parents immortal glory and memory;
And if you like, she said, think what children Lycurgus left behind in Lacedaemon, saviours of Lacedaemon and, one might almost say, of Greece.
Solon too is honoured among you for his begetting of the laws, and other men in many other places, both among Greeks and among barbarians, who have brought forth many fine works and begotten virtue of every kind;
and many shrines have already been raised to them on account of such children, while on account of merely human children none has been raised to anyone yet.
Into these erotic mysteries, then, Socrates, perhaps even you might be initiated;
but the final and highest revelations, for whose sake even these exist if one pursues the matter rightly — I do not know whether you would be capable of them.
Well, I shall speak, she said, and shall not fall short in zeal;
and you must try to follow, if you are able.
For he who would go rightly about this business, she said, must begin while young by going to beautiful bodies, and first, if his guide guides him rightly, he must love one single body and there beget beautiful discourses; then he must perceive that the beauty upon any one body is brother to the beauty upon another, and that, if he is to pursue beauty of form, it is great folly not to hold the beauty upon all bodies to be one and the same;
and having grasped this, he must make himself a lover of all beautiful bodies, and slacken that vehement passion for one, despising it and counting it a small thing;
after this he must come to hold the beauty in souls more precious than that in the body, so that if someone decent in soul has even a slight bloom about him, it suffices him, and he loves and cares for him and begets and seeks out such discourses as will make the young better — so that he may be compelled in turn to behold the beautiful in practices and in laws, and to see that all of it is akin to itself, in order that he may come to count the beauty of the body a small thing;
and after practices he must be led on to the sciences, so that he may see in turn the beauty of sciences, and, looking now upon beauty in its vastness, may no longer, like a house-slave, cherishing the beauty of one — of some boy or man or single practice — be mean and small-minded in his servitude, but, turned toward the great open sea of the beautiful and contemplating it, may beget many beautiful and magnificent discourses and thoughts in ungrudging philosophy, until, strengthened and grown great there, he catches sight of a single science of such a kind, whose object is beauty of the kind I shall now tell.
And try, she said, to give me your fullest possible attention.
For he who has been led thus far in the schooling of love, beholding beautiful things in due order and rightly, coming now to the final goal of the mysteries of love, will suddenly catch sight of something wondrously beautiful in its nature — that very thing, Socrates, for whose sake all the earlier labours were undergone: first, a beauty that always is, neither coming to be nor perishing, neither waxing nor waning; next, one that is not beautiful in one respect and ugly in another, nor beautiful at one time and not at another, nor beautiful in relation to one thing and ugly in relation to another, nor beautiful here and ugly there, as being beautiful to some and ugly to others;
nor again will the beautiful appear to him as some face or hands or anything else in which body has a share, nor as some discourse or some science, nor as existing anywhere in something else — in a living creature, say, or in earth or in heaven or in anything else — but itself by itself with itself, single in form, ever being; while all the other beautiful things partake of it in some such way that, though they come to be and perish, it becomes neither greater nor less, nor suffers anything at all.
So whenever a man, ascending from these things through the right love of boys, begins to catch sight of that beauty, he is all but touching the goal.
For this is the right way to go to the things of love, or to be led by another: beginning from these beautiful things here, for the sake of that beauty to ascend ever upward, as if using the rungs of a ladder — from one beautiful body to two, and from two to all beautiful bodies, and from beautiful bodies to beautiful practices, and from practices to beautiful studies, and from studies to end at that study which is the study of nothing other than that beauty itself, so that at the last he may know what beauty itself is.
There, if anywhere, my dear Socrates, said the stranger of Mantinea, life is worth living for a human being — beholding the beautiful itself.
If ever you see it, it will not seem to you to be of the order of gold or raiment or the beautiful boys and young men who now so strike you out of your senses when you look at them that you, and many others, gazing on your darlings and being with them always, are ready — were it somehow possible — neither to eat nor to drink, but only to gaze and to be with them.
What then, she said, do we suppose it would be, if it were granted to someone to see the beautiful itself, unalloyed, pure, unmixed — not infected with human flesh and colours and much other mortal rubbish — but he could catch sight of the divine beauty itself, single in form?
Do you think, she said, that life would be a poor thing for a man looking there, beholding that with the faculty by which it must be beheld, and being with it?
Or do you not perceive, she said, that there alone it will be his lot, seeing the beautiful with that by which it is visible, to beget not images of virtue — since it is no image he touches — but true virtue, since it is the truth he touches;
and that to him who has begotten true virtue and reared it, it is given to become dear to the gods, and, if to any human being, to him to become immortal?
These things, then, Phaedrus and the rest of you, Diotima said, and I am persuaded of them;
and being persuaded, I try to persuade others too that for the winning of this possession one would not easily find a better fellow-worker with human nature than Eros.
Therefore I declare that every man must honour Eros, and I myself honour the things of love and practise them beyond others, and I exhort the rest, and now and always I extol the power and courage of Eros so far as I am able.
This speech, then, Phaedrus — regard it, if you will, as an encomium spoken in honour of Eros; or else call it whatever, and in whatever way, it pleases you to call it.
When Socrates had said this, he related, the others praised it, but Aristophanes was trying to say something, because Socrates in speaking had made mention of him with reference to his speech;
when suddenly there came a great din of knocking at the courtyard door, as of revellers, and they heard the voice of a flute-girl.
So Agathon said: Boys, go and see, won't you?
And if it is one of our friends, invite him in;
if not, say that we are not drinking but are already retiring.
And not long after they heard the voice of Alcibiades in the courtyard, very drunk and shouting loudly, asking where Agathon was and bidding them bring him to Agathon.
So the flute-girl, supporting him, together with some others of his followers, brought him in to them, and he stood at the doors, crowned with a thick wreath of ivy and violets, with a great many ribbons on his head, and said:
Greetings, gentlemen!
Will you receive as a fellow-drinker a man who is very drunk indeed, or shall we go away, once we have wreathed Agathon — the very thing we came for?
For I, he said, could not manage to come yesterday, but now I have come with the ribbons on my head, so that from my own head I may wreathe the head of the wisest and most beautiful man — if I may put it just like that.
