Then Eryximachus said: since Pausanias, after starting on his speech finely, did not bring it to an adequate completion, it seems to me necessary that I should try to put a finish on the speech.
For that Eros is double seems to me a fine distinction to have drawn;
but that he exists not only in the souls of men, directed at the beautiful, but also directed at many other things and in other domains — in the bodies of all animals, in the things that grow in the earth, and, one might almost say, in everything that is — this I believe I have observed from medicine, our own art: how great and wondrous the god is, and how he extends over everything, in human affairs and divine alike.
I shall begin my account from medicine, so that we may also give the art its place of honour.
For the nature of bodies contains this double Eros:
the healthy state of the body and the diseased are, by common admission, different and unlike, and the unlike desires and loves unlike things.
So the love residing in the healthy condition is one thing, and that in the diseased condition another.
Now, just as Pausanias was saying a moment ago that it is fine to gratify the good among men and shameful to gratify the licentious, so also within bodies themselves it is fine, and indeed necessary, to gratify what is good and healthy in each body — and this is what bears the name of medicine — while to gratify what is bad and diseased is shameful, and one must refuse it, if one is to be a practitioner of the art.
For medicine is, to speak summarily, knowledge of the body's erotic tendencies with respect to filling and emptying, and he who diagnoses in these the fine and the shameful love is the most medically skilled; and he who effects a change, so that the body acquires the one love in place of the other, and who knows how to implant love where it is absent but ought to be present, and to remove it where it is present, would be a good craftsman.
For one must indeed be able to make the most hostile elements in the body friendly and to make them love one another.
The most hostile are the most opposite: cold to hot, bitter to sweet, dry to moist, and everything of that kind;
it was by knowing how to implant love and concord among these that our forefather Asclepius, as these poets here say and I believe, established our art.
So medicine, as I say, is governed wholly through this god, and likewise gymnastics and agriculture;
and music, it is plain to anyone who pays even slight attention, stands in the same condition as these — as perhaps Heraclitus also means to say, although in his actual words he does not put it well.
For he says that the one, being at variance with itself, agrees with itself, like the harmony of a bow and of a lyre.
But it is great absurdity to say that a harmony is at variance, or that it consists of elements still at variance.
Perhaps, however, what he meant to say was this: that harmony has come into being, by the art of music, out of the high and the low, which were formerly at variance and afterwards came to agreement.
For surely there could be no harmony out of high and low while they are still at variance:
for harmony is consonance, and consonance is a kind of agreement — and agreement out of things at variance, so long as they are at variance, is impossible;
and again, what is at variance and not in agreement cannot be harmonised — just as rhythm too has come into being out of the fast and the slow, formerly at variance, afterwards brought to agreement.
And the agreement in all these cases is implanted, as medicine does there, so music does here, by producing love and concord between them;
and music, in turn, is knowledge of the erotic tendencies concerned with harmony and rhythm.
And in the constitution itself of harmony and rhythm there is no difficulty in diagnosing the erotic elements, nor is the double love yet present there;
but when one must apply rhythm and harmony to men, either by composing — which they call melody-making — or by using correctly the melodies and metres already composed — which has been called education — then indeed it is difficult, and a good craftsman is required.
For the same account comes round again: that one must gratify the orderly among men, and in such a way that those not yet orderly may become more so, and must guard their love; and this is the fine one, the heavenly one, the Eros of the heavenly Muse;
whereas the Eros of Polymnia is the common one, whom one must apply with caution to whomever one applies him, so that the pleasure of him may be reaped without implanting any licentiousness — just as in our art it is a great task to make good use of the appetites concerned with the art of cookery, so as to reap the pleasure without disease.
In music, then, and in medicine and in everything else, both human and divine, so far as it admits of it, one must keep watch over each of the two loves;
for both are present.
Indeed, the constitution of the seasons of the year too is full of both of these: whenever the things I was speaking of just now — the hot and the cold, the dry and the moist — obtain the orderly love toward one another and take on a temperate harmony and blending, they come bringing good seasons and health to men and to the other animals and plants, and do no wrong;
but whenever the Eros accompanied by violence gains the upper hand over the seasons of the year, he destroys much and does much wrong.
For plagues are apt to arise from such conditions, and many other disparate diseases both for beasts and for plants;
for frosts, hailstorms, and blights arise from the mutual encroachment and disorder of such erotic elements toward one another — the knowledge of which, concerning the movements of the stars and the seasons of the years, is called astronomy.
Further still, all sacrifices, and the matters over which divination presides — that is, the communion of gods and men with one another — are concerned with nothing other than the guarding and the healing of Eros.
For every kind of impiety is apt to arise if one does not gratify the orderly Eros nor honour him and give him precedence in every action, but the other one, both with respect to parents, living and dead, and with respect to the gods;
and it is precisely these matters that divination has been appointed to oversee in those who love, and to treat, and divination in its turn is the craftsman of friendship between gods and men, by its knowledge of the erotic tendencies among men, so far as they bear on right and piety.
So great and powerful — or rather, all-embracing — is the power that Eros as a whole possesses; but the Eros that is brought to completion with temperance and justice, concerned with good things, both among us and among the gods, this one holds the greatest power and provides us with all happiness, making us able to associate with one another and to be friends both among ourselves and with the gods, who are stronger than we.
Perhaps I too, in praising Eros, am leaving out much, though certainly not willingly.
But if I have omitted anything, it is your task, Aristophanes, to fill it in;
or if you have in mind to praise the god in some other way, praise him so, since your hiccups have now stopped.
