For first, as I say, he said that Phaedrus began speaking from some such point as this: that Eros is a great god, and wondrous among both men and gods, in many other ways, and not least in respect of his birth.
For that the god is among the eldest is a thing of honour, said he; and the proof of this is as follows:
for parents of Eros there are none, nor are any spoken of by anyone, whether layman or poet; rather, Hesiod says that Chaos came into being first — 'but then broad-breasted Earth, the ever-secure seat of all things, and Eros' — and Acusilaus agrees with Hesiod that after Chaos these two came into being, Earth and Eros.
And Parmenides says of the birth: 'first of all the gods she devised Eros.'
Thus from many sources it is agreed that Eros is among the eldest.
And being eldest, he is the cause of the greatest goods for us.
For I for my part cannot say what greater good there is for a man from his very youth than a worthy lover, or for a lover than a beloved boy.
For that which ought to guide, through their whole life, those men who mean to live nobly — this neither kinship is able to implant so nobly, nor honours, nor wealth, nor anything else, as love.
And what do I say this is?
Shame at what is shameful, and ambition for what is noble;
for without these it is not possible for either a city or a private man to accomplish great and noble deeds.
I say, then, that a man who loves, if he were found out doing something shameful, or suffering it from someone and through unmanliness failing to defend himself, would not be so pained at being seen by his father, nor by his comrades, nor by anyone else, as by his beloved.
And this very same thing we see in the beloved as well: that he feels shame before his lovers above all others, whenever he is seen to be involved in something shameful.
If, then, some contrivance could be found so that a city or an army might come into being made up of lovers and their beloveds, there is no way they could order their own affairs better than by abstaining from everything shameful and striving for honour in one another's eyes; and fighting side by side, such men, though few, would conquer, one might almost say, all mankind.
For a man in love would surely less endure being seen by his beloved deserting his post or throwing away his arms than being seen by all the rest, and rather than that he would choose many times over to die.
And as for abandoning his beloved, or failing to come to his aid when he is in danger — no one is so base that Eros himself would not make him inspired towards valour, so that he is the equal of the man who is best by nature;
and simply put, what Homer said — that the god 'breathed might' into some of the heroes — this Eros supplies to lovers, as something arising from himself.
And what is more, only those who love are willing to die for another — not only men, but women too.
Of this, Alcestis the daughter of Pelias provides sufficient testimony before the Greeks on behalf of this argument: she alone was willing to die for her husband, though he had both a father and a mother, whom she so far surpassed in affection because of her love as to show them up as strangers to their own son, kin to him in name only; and by doing this deed she was thought, not only by men but also by gods, to have done a deed so noble that, though many have done many noble deeds, the gods have granted to some easily counted few this prize, that their soul be sent up again from Hades — yet hers they sent up, in admiration at her deed;
so it is that the gods too give highest honour to zeal and virtue in the matter of love.
But Orpheus the son of Oeagrus they sent away from Hades unsuccessful, showing him a phantom of the wife for whom he had come, but not giving the woman herself, because he seemed to them to be playing the coward, being a lyre-singer, and not to dare to die for the sake of his love as Alcestis did, but to contrive to enter Hades while still alive.
For this very reason, then, they laid a penalty upon him, and made his death come about at the hands of women — not as they honoured Achilles, the son of Thetis, and sent him away to the Isles of the Blest, because, having learned from his mother that he would die if he killed Hector, but that if he did not do this he would return home and end his days in old age, he dared to choose, by coming to the aid of his lover Patroclus and avenging him, not only to die for him but to die after him, when he was already dead;
and for this the gods, in exceeding admiration, honoured him surpassingly, because he set so high a value on his lover.
