But Aeschylus talks nonsense when he claims that Achilles was the lover of Patroclus — Achilles, who was more beautiful not only than Patroclus but than all the heroes together, and still beardless, and moreover much younger, as Homer says.
But the truth is that while the gods do honour most highly this virtue that concerns love, they marvel and admire and confer benefits still more when the beloved cherishes the lover than when the lover cherishes his darling.
For a lover is a more divine thing than a beloved;
for he has the god within him.
For these reasons they honoured Achilles even above Alcestis, sending him to the Isles of the Blessed.
Thus I for my part declare that Eros is, among the gods, the oldest and most honoured and most sovereign for the acquisition of virtue and happiness by men, both living and dead.
Some such speech as this, he said, was what Phaedrus delivered, and after Phaedrus there were certain others which he did not very well remember;
passing these over, he went on to relate the speech of Pausanias.
And Pausanias, he said, spoke as follows: the theme, Phaedrus, seems to me not to have been well laid before us — I mean the instruction, given thus simply and without qualification, to eulogise Love.
For if Eros were one, that would be well and good; but as it is, he is not one;
and since he is not one, it is more correct to declare beforehand which kind is to be praised.
I shall therefore try to set this right: first, to specify the Love who ought to be praised, and then to praise him in a manner worthy of the god.
For we all know that there is no Aphrodite without Eros.
Now if she were one, Eros would be one;
but since in fact there are two of her, of necessity there must also be two Erotes.
And how are the goddesses not two?
The one, surely, is the elder, the motherless daughter of Ouranos, whom we accordingly surname Ourania, the Heavenly;
the younger is the daughter of Zeus and Dione, whom we call Pandemos, the Common.
It follows of necessity that the Love who is fellow-worker with the latter is rightly called Common, and the other Heavenly.
Now all gods, to be sure, must be praised; but one must try to state what provinces the two have severally been allotted.
For the case of every action stands thus:
performed in and of itself, it is neither fine nor shameful.
For instance, what we are doing now — drinking, or singing, or conversing — none of these is in itself a fine thing; rather it is in the doing, according as it is done, that it turns out one or the other:
done finely and rightly, it becomes fine; done not rightly, shameful.
Just so with loving, then, and with Eros: not every Love is fine or worthy of eulogy, but only the one who impels us to love finely.
Now the Love belonging to Aphrodite Pandemos is truly common and accomplishes whatever comes his way;
and this is the love with which the baser sort of men love.
Such men love, in the first place, women no less than boys; next, in those they love, the bodies rather than the souls; and further, the most unintelligent persons they can find, since they look only to accomplishing the act, careless whether it be done finely or not;
whence it befalls them to do whatever they happen upon, the good and its opposite alike.
For this love derives from the goddess who is much younger than the other, and who in her origin partakes of both female and male.
But the Love of Ourania — of her who, first, partakes not of the female but of the male only (and this is the love of boys), and who, secondly, is the elder, with no share in wanton outrage —
hence it is that those inspired by this love turn to the male, cherishing what is by nature the more vigorous and the more possessed of mind.
And even within paederasty itself one may recognise those who have been driven purely by this love;
for they do not love boys as such, but only when they are now beginning to acquire mind — and this comes near the time of the beard's first growth.
For those who begin their loving from that point are, I think, prepared to be together for the whole of life and to share their lives in common — not to deceive, having caught a boy in the folly of youth, and then with a laugh of scorn to be off and away, running after another.
Indeed there ought also to be a law against loving boys, so that great pains might not be spent upon an uncertain issue;
for the outcome with boys is uncertain — where it will end, in vice or in virtue, of soul and of body alike.
Good men, then, lay down this law for themselves of their own free will; but one ought to compel those common lovers too to the like restraint, just as we compel them, so far as we are able, not to make love to free-born women.
For it is these men who have created the reproach, so that some make bold to say that it is shameful to gratify lovers;
and they say it with their eyes on these men, seeing their unseasonableness and injustice — since surely nothing whatever that is done decently and lawfully would justly incur censure.
Moreover, the custom concerning love in the other cities is easy to grasp, for it has been defined in simple terms;
but the custom here and in Lacedaemon is complicated.
In Elis, for instance, and among the Boeotians, and wherever men are not clever at speaking, it has been laid down simply that gratifying lovers is fine, and no one, young or old, would call it shameful — in order, I suppose, that they may save themselves the trouble of trying to persuade the young by argument, being incapable of speaking;
in Ionia, on the other hand, and in many other places it has been accounted shameful — wherever men dwell under barbarians.
For to the barbarians, on account of their tyrannies, this at any rate is shameful — as are philosophy and the love of athletic exercise;
for it is not, I suppose, to the rulers' advantage that great spirits should be engendered in their subjects, nor strong friendships and associations — the very things which, above all else, love is wont to implant.
And the tyrants here learned this by hard experience;
for the love of Aristogeiton and the friendship of Harmodius, once grown firm, put down their rule.
Thus where it was laid down as shameful to gratify lovers, it stands so by the badness of those who laid it down — the greed of the rulers and the unmanliness of the ruled;
and where it was held simply honourable, that is owing to the laziness of soul of those who laid it down.
Here, however, the matter has been regulated far more finely than in those places, and, as I said, it is not easy to grasp.
For when one considers that it is said to be finer to love openly than in secret, and especially to love the noblest and best, even if they are less handsome than others; and again that the encouragement given to the lover by everyone is extraordinary — not as to a man doing anything shameful — and that success is held honourable for him and failure shameful; and that, for the attempt at conquest, custom has granted the lover licence to be praised for doing astonishing deeds, deeds which, if anyone dared to do them in pursuit of anything else whatsoever, wishing to accomplish anything but this, he would reap the greatest reproaches upon his conduct — for if, wishing to get money from someone, or to hold office, or to gain some other position of power, a man were willing to do the sorts of things lovers do towards their favourites, making supplications and entreaties in their petitions, swearing oaths, sleeping at doorways, and willing to perform slaveries such as no slave would perform, he would be hindered from carrying on the business in that way both by friends and by enemies, the latter reproaching him for flattery and servility, the former admonishing him and feeling ashamed on his behalf — yet for the lover who does all these things there is a certain grace, and custom allows him to do them without reproach, as though he were accomplishing something wholly noble;
and — what is strangest of all, at least as most people say — that he alone has pardon from the gods when he swears and then breaks his oaths — for a lover's oath, they say, is no oath;
so it is that both gods and men have given every licence to the lover, as the custom of this place declares — and on this ground one might suppose that in this city both loving, and becoming a friend to one's lovers, is held to be a wholly noble thing.
But when fathers set attendants over the boys who are loved and forbid them to converse with their lovers, and the attendant has standing orders to that effect; and when the boy's age-mates and companions reproach him if they see anything of the sort going on, and the elders in their turn neither restrain those who reproach him nor revile them for speaking wrongly — then, looking at all this, one would conclude on the contrary that such conduct is held most shameful here.
But the truth of it, I think, is this:
it is no simple matter — as was said at the beginning, it is in itself neither honourable nor shameful, but honourable if done honourably, shameful if done shamefully.
Now it is doing it shamefully to gratify a base man, and basely; and doing it honourably to gratify a good man, and honourably.
And base is that common lover, the one who loves the body rather than the soul;
for indeed he is not even constant, seeing that what he loves is not constant either.
For the moment the bloom of the body he loved begins to fade, he is off and away on the wing, having put to shame all his many words and promises;
whereas the lover of a character that is good remains for life, since he has been fused with something constant.
These, then, our custom means to put well and truly to the test, so that the boy may gratify the one sort and escape the other.
For this reason, then, it urges the one party to pursue and the other to flee, presiding over the contest and testing to which class the lover belongs and to which the beloved.
So it is for this cause that, first, it is held shameful to be caught quickly — in order that time may intervene, which is thought to test most things well; and next, it is shameful to be caught by money or by political power, whether the boy cowers under ill-treatment and fails to hold out, or, when done favours in money or in political advancements, fails to despise them;
for none of these things seems either steadfast or constant — quite apart from the fact that no generous friendship can ever grow from them.
One road, then, is left by our custom, if a favourite is to gratify a lover honourably.
For it is our rule that, just as in the case of the lovers it was no flattery nor any matter of reproach to be willing to serve a favourite in any slavery whatsoever, so too there is left one other willing slavery — one only — that carries no reproach:
and this is the slavery that concerns virtue.
For it is our settled custom that if anyone is willing to devote his service to another in the belief that through that man he will be made better, whether in some wisdom or in any other part of virtue whatsoever, this willing slavery in its turn is neither shameful nor flattery.
These two rules, then, must be brought together into one — the rule concerning the love of boys and the rule concerning philosophy and the rest of virtue — if it is to come about that a favourite's gratifying his lover is a noble thing.
For when lover and favourite come together, each with his rule — the one holding that in serving a favourite who has gratified him he would justly serve him in anything whatsoever, the other that in rendering service to the man who is making him wise and good he would justly render him any service in his turn; the one able to contribute towards understanding and the rest of virtue, the other needing to acquire education and the rest of wisdom — then indeed, when these rules converge into one, there and there alone does it come about that a favourite's gratifying his lover is honourable, but nowhere else.
On these terms even to be deceived is no disgrace;
whereas on all other terms it brings shame, whether one is deceived or not.
For if someone should gratify a lover as being rich, for the sake of his wealth, and be deceived and get no money because the lover turned out to be poor, it is no less shameful;
for such a person seems to have shown this much at least of himself, that for money he would render any service whatsoever to anyone whatsoever, and that is not honourable.
By the same reasoning, even if someone should gratify a lover as being good, expecting that he himself would be made better through the lover's friendship, and were deceived because that man turned out to be bad and not possessed of virtue, still the deception is an honourable one;
for this man too, in his turn, seems to have made plain what lies in him: that for virtue's sake, and in order to become better, he would show every eagerness towards anyone — and this again is the noblest thing of all;
so it is in every way wholly honourable to grant one's favours for virtue's sake.
This is the Love that belongs to the heavenly goddess, himself heavenly and of great worth both to city and to private persons, since he compels both the lover himself and his beloved to take great care for virtue;
all the other loves belong to the other goddess, the common one.
'This, Phaedrus,' he said, 'is what I contribute to you on the subject of Eros, offhand as it is.'
When Pausanias came to a pause — the professors, you see, teach me to speak in balanced clauses like that — Aristodemus said it was Aristophanes' turn to speak, but a hiccup happened to have come over him, from over-fullness or from some other cause, and he was not able to speak; instead he said — for the doctor Eryximachus was reclining on the couch just below him — 'Eryximachus, you are the proper man either to stop my hiccups or to speak in my place until I stop.'
And Eryximachus said, 'Well, I shall do both:
for I shall speak in your turn, and you, when you have stopped, in mine.
And while I am speaking, see if the hiccups consent to stop while you hold your breath for a good long time;
if not, gargle with water.
And if after all it is very strong, take up something of the sort you could tickle your nose with, and sneeze;
and if you do this once or twice, then, however strong it is, it will stop.'
'Start speaking — the sooner the better,' Aristodemus reported Aristophanes as saying;
'and I will do as you say.'
