Are you going to laugh at me for being drunk?
Well, even if you do laugh, I know perfectly well all the same that I'm telling the truth.
But tell me right from where you stand: am I to come in on the stated terms, or not?
Will you drink with me or not?
So everyone burst into applause and told him to come in and take a couch, and Agathon called him over.
And he came, led by his people, and as he was pulling off the ribbons to tie them on Agathon, having them dangling in front of his eyes he did not spot Socrates, but sat down beside Agathon, between Socrates and him;
for Socrates had moved aside when he caught sight of him.
And sitting down beside him, he embraced Agathon and tied the ribbons on him.
Then Agathon said, 'Take off Alcibiades' sandals, boys, so he can recline as our third.'
'By all means,' said Alcibiades;
'but who is this third drinking-partner of ours?'
And turning round as he spoke, he saw Socrates, and at the sight he leapt up and said, 'Heracles! What's this?'
Socrates — here?
Lying in ambush for me again, reclining there, the way you always used to pop up out of nowhere wherever I least expected you to be.
And now — what have you come for?
And why, once again, did you take your place here?
Not beside Aristophanes, of course, or anyone else who is funny or wants to be — no, you schemed to get yourself reclining beside the handsomest man in the room.
And Socrates said, 'Agathon, see if you will come to my defence;
because my love for this man has turned out to be no trifling business.
Ever since the moment I fell in love with him, I have no longer been allowed so much as to glance at or chat with a single good-looking person, or else this fellow, jealous and envious of me, works astonishing mischief — he abuses me and can barely keep his hands off me.
So watch that he doesn't do something even now — reconcile us; or if he tries to use force, defend me, for I am utterly terrified of this man's madness and his lover's frenzy.'
'No,' said Alcibiades, 'between me and you there is no reconciliation.
But I'll take my revenge on you for all this some other time;
for now, Agathon,' he said, 'hand me a share of the ribbons, so I can wreathe this man's marvellous head as well, and he won't reproach me that I crowned you but never crowned him — him, the man who conquers everyone in the world with words, not just the day before yesterday as you did, but always.'
And with that, taking some of the ribbons, he tied them on Socrates and settled back on the couch.
And when he had settled down, he said,
'Well now, gentlemen;
you look sober to me.
That can't be allowed you — you must drink;
those were the terms we agreed on.
So as master of the drinking, until you've all drunk enough, I elect — myself.
Come, Agathon, have someone fetch a big cup, if there is one.
No — on second thoughts, no need: bring that wine-cooler over there, boy,' he said, having seen that it held more than eight half-pints.
Having had it filled, he first drank it down himself, then ordered it filled up for Socrates, saying as he did so,
'Against Socrates, gentlemen, my little trick counts for nothing:
however much anyone tells him to drink, he drinks it all off and is never one bit the drunker for it.'
So Socrates, once the boy had poured, drank;
and Eryximachus said, 'Well then, Alcibiades, how are we managing things?
Are we simply going to drink like thirsty men — nothing said over the cup, nothing sung?'
Then Alcibiades said, 'Eryximachus, best of sons of the best and most temperate of fathers — greetings!'
'Greetings to you too,' said Eryximachus;
'but what are we to do?'
'Whatever you command.
For we must obey you:
"a man of healing is worth a host of other men";
so prescribe whatever you like.'
'Then listen,' said Eryximachus.
'Before you came in, we resolved that each of us in turn, going round to the right, should make the finest speech he could in praise of Eros, and deliver his eulogy.
All the rest of us, then, have already spoken;
but you, since you have not spoken and have drunk your cup dry, are bound in fairness to speak, and after speaking to lay whatever command you like on Socrates, and he on the man to his right, and so on with the others.
Well, Eryximachus, said Alcibiades, that is finely said; but for a drunken man to set his words against the speeches of sober men — I fear that would hardly be an even match.
And besides, my dear fellow, does Socrates really persuade you of anything he said just now?
Or do you know that the truth is the complete opposite of what he was saying?
For this man, if I praise anyone in his presence, whether a god or any human being other than himself, will not keep his two hands off me.
Hold your tongue!
said Socrates.
By Poseidon, said Alcibiades, say nothing against it, for I would not praise a single other man while you are present.
Well then, do just that, said Eryximachus, if you like;
praise Socrates.
What do you mean?
said Alcibiades.
Do you think I should, Eryximachus?
Am I to set upon the man and take my revenge on him in front of you all?
You there, said Socrates, what do you have in mind?
To praise me so as to make me more ridiculous?
Or what will you do?
I shall tell the truth.
But see whether you allow it.
Well, as for the truth, he said, I allow it — indeed I order you to speak it.
I shall lose no time about it, said Alcibiades.
And you, mind you, do this.
If I say anything untrue, break in on me midway, if you like, and say that in this I am lying;
for I will not lie in anything, so far as I can help it.
If, however, in dredging up my memories I say one thing now and another from somewhere else, do not be surprised;
for it is no easy matter, for a man in my condition, to count off your strangeness fluently and in proper order.
It is through images, gentlemen, that I shall attempt to praise Socrates.
Now he perhaps will think it is to make him more ridiculous, but the image will be for the sake of truth, not of mockery.
For I say he is exactly like those Silenus-figures that sit in the statuaries' shops, the ones the craftsmen fashion holding pan-pipes or flutes, which, when they are opened up in two, are seen to hold images of gods inside.
And I say, again, that he is like the satyr Marsyas.
Now that in your looks, at least, you resemble these creatures, Socrates, surely not even you yourself would dispute;
but that you resemble them in everything else as well — hear what comes next.
You are an outrageous bully.
Or are you not?
If you do not admit it, I will produce witnesses.
But not a flute-player, you say?
Oh yes — far more wonderful than that one.
He, at any rate, used to enchant men through instruments, by the power that came from his mouth, and still to this day whoever plays his tunes — for the tunes Olympus played I count as Marsyas', since Marsyas taught him — those tunes of his, then, whether a good flute-player plays them or a wretched flute-girl, are the only ones that cast men into possession and reveal those who have need of the gods and of the mystery-rites, because the tunes themselves are divine.
But you differ from him only in this much, that without instruments, with bare words, you do this very same thing.
We, at any rate, when we hear anyone else speaking other speeches, even a thoroughly good orator, practically none of us cares at all;
but whenever anyone hears you, or your words spoken by another — even if the speaker is utterly worthless, and whether it is a woman listening or a man or a stripling — we are thunderstruck and possessed.
I at least, gentlemen, if I were not going to seem completely drunk, would tell you on oath what I myself have suffered under this man's words, and suffer still even now.
For whenever I hear him, my heart leaps far more than the hearts of those in Corybantic frenzy, and tears pour out under the force of this man's words; and I see very many others suffering the same things.
When I heard Pericles and other good orators, I thought they spoke well, but I suffered nothing of that sort, nor was my soul thrown into turmoil, nor did it grow indignant at my living the life of a slave; but by this Marsyas here I have many a time been put into such a state that it seemed to me not worth living in the condition I am in.
And this, Socrates, you will not say is untrue.
And even now I am conscious in myself that if I were willing to lend him my ears, I could not hold out, but would suffer the very same things.
For he compels me to admit that, though I am myself still lacking in so much, I neglect myself and busy myself instead with the affairs of the Athenians.
So I force myself, as if from the Sirens, to stop my ears and flee, so that I don't grow old sitting right there beside him.
And he is the only man in the world before whom I have felt a thing no one would believe was in me — shame before anyone at all:
yet before him, and him alone, I feel shame.
For I am conscious in myself that I cannot argue back that I ought not to do what he tells me, and yet whenever I leave him, I am beaten by the honour the crowd pays me.
So I play the runaway slave and flee from him, and whenever I see him, I am ashamed of what I have admitted.
And often I would gladly see him no longer among mankind;
yet if that actually happened, I know well I should be far more miserable — so I simply do not know what to do with this man.
Such, then, is what I and many others have suffered from this satyr's flute-playing;
but hear from me in what other ways he is like the figures I compared him to, and how marvellous the power is that he has.
For be well assured that not one of you knows this man;
but I will reveal him, since I have begun.
You see, of course, that Socrates is amorously disposed towards the beautiful, and is always hovering about them and thunderstruck by them, and again that he is ignorant of everything and knows nothing.
Isn't this pose of his just like a Silenus?
Very much so.
For this he wears wrapped round him on the outside, like the carved Silenus;
but once he is opened up, gentlemen of the drinking party, can you imagine how full he is, inside, of temperance?
Know that it matters nothing at all to him whether someone is beautiful — he despises that more than any one of you could believe — nor whether someone is rich, nor whether he holds any other distinction of those the multitude counts blessed;
he considers all these possessions worth nothing, and us to be nothing — I tell you — and he spends his whole life playing the ironist and joking with mankind.
But when he is in earnest and opened up, I do not know whether anyone has seen the images inside;
but I saw them once, and they seemed to me so divine and golden and utterly beautiful and marvellous that, in short, whatever Socrates commanded had to be done.
And believing that he was in earnest about my youthful bloom, I thought it a godsend and a marvellous stroke of luck for me, since by gratifying Socrates it was open to me to hear everything that he knew;
for I was, you see, wonderfully proud of my bloom.
With this in mind, then — though before that I had not been in the habit of being alone with him without an attendant — I now sent the attendant away and met him alone; for I must tell you the whole truth:
so pay attention, and if I lie, Socrates, refute me — I met him, gentlemen, alone with him alone, and I thought he would at once talk with me as a lover talks with his beloved in solitude, and I rejoiced.
But nothing of the sort happened at all; he would converse with me just as he was accustomed, and after spending the day with me he would go off and leave.
After that I invited him to exercise with me, and I exercised with him, expecting to accomplish something there.
So he exercised with me and wrestled with me many times when no one was present;
and what need is there to tell it?
I got no further at all.
And since I was getting nowhere by that route, I decided I must set upon the man by main force and not let go, seeing that I had put my hand to it, but must find out at once what the matter really was.
So I invite him to dine with me, plotting quite simply like a lover against his beloved.
And even this he was not quick to grant me, but in time, at any rate, he was persuaded.
And when he came the first time, he wanted to leave as soon as he had dined.
And that time, out of shame, I let him go;
but plotting again, once we had dined I kept the conversation going far into the night, and when he wanted to leave, I pleaded that it was late and compelled him to stay.
So he took his rest on the couch next to mine, the very one on which he had dined, and no one else was sleeping in the room but ourselves.
Now up to this point in the story it would be quite proper to tell it to anyone whatever;
but from here on you would not have heard me tell it, were it not, first, that — as the saying goes — wine, with children or without them, is truthful, and second, that to hide a superb deed of Socrates, when I have come to praise him, seems to me unjust.
And besides, the plight of the man bitten by the viper holds me too.
For they say, I believe, that one who has suffered this refuses to say what it was like except to those who have been bitten, since they alone will understand and will forgive him whatever he dared to do and say under the pain.
Well, I have been bitten by something more painful, and in the most painful spot where one can be bitten — struck and bitten in the heart, or the soul, or whatever one must call it, by the discourses of philosophy, which grip more savagely than a viper when they take hold of a young soul not without gifts, and make it do and say anything whatever — and seeing, moreover, all the Phaedruses, Agathons, Eryximachuses, Pausaniases, Aristodemuses and Aristophaneses here;
and Socrates himself — what need to mention him, and all the rest?
For you have all shared in the philosophic madness and Bacchic frenzy — therefore you shall all hear;
for you will forgive both what was done then and what is said now.
But you house-servants, and any other man profane and boorish, clap great gates upon your ears.
Well then, gentlemen, when the lamp had gone out and the slaves were outside, I decided I must use no subtlety with him, but say freely what I thought;
and I nudged him and said, Socrates, are you asleep?
Certainly not, he said.
Do you know, then, what I have decided?
What, exactly? he said.
You seem to me, I said, to be the only lover who has proved worthy of me, and you appear to me to be shy of mentioning it to me.
But here is how I stand:
I think it would be utterly senseless not to gratify you in this, and in anything else you might need, whether from my property or from my friends.
For nothing matters more to me than that I become as good as possible, and in this I believe no one is a more authoritative helper for me than you.
So I would be far more ashamed before men of sense for not gratifying such a man than ashamed before the many and the foolish for gratifying him.
And he, when he had heard this, said — very ironically, and very much in his own characteristic and habitual way — My dear Alcibiades, you may really be no mean fellow, if what you say about me happens to be true and there is in me some power through which you could become better;
in that case you must be seeing in me an irresistible beauty, one vastly superior to the fine looks you have yourself.
If then, having caught sight of it, you are trying to strike a bargain with me and to exchange beauty for beauty, you mean to get no small advantage over me — you are attempting to acquire true beauty in exchange for the mere appearance of it, and in real truth you are planning to trade gold for bronze.
But look more closely, my blessed friend, lest it escape you that I am nothing.
The sight of the mind, you know, begins to see sharply when the sight of the eyes starts to fail from its prime;
and you are still a long way from that.
And I, hearing this, said: On my side, that is how things are, and none of it has been said otherwise than as I think it;
so deliberate for yourself in whatever way you judge best for you and for me.
Well, he said, in that at least you speak well;
for in the time to come we shall take counsel and do whatever appears best to the two of us, both in these matters and in the rest.
So I, having heard and said these things, and having let fly my arrows, as it were, thought he had been wounded;
and getting up, and not allowing him to say anything more, I wrapped my own cloak around him — for it was winter — and lying down under this man's threadbare mantle, throwing my two arms around this truly daimonic and wonderful man, I lay there the whole night through.
And this too, Socrates, you will not say that I am lying about.
And when I had done all this, he so completely got the better of me, and disdained and laughed at my youthful beauty, and treated it with outrage — and on that point at least I thought I was something, gentlemen of the jury;
for you are jurors trying Socrates' arrogance — for know it well, by the gods, by the goddesses: I got up after sleeping with Socrates having experienced nothing more remarkable than if I had slept with my father or an elder brother.
After that, what state of mind do you suppose I was in — thinking myself dishonoured, yet admiring this man's nature and self-mastery and courage, having come upon a man such as I never thought I would meet for wisdom and endurance?
The result was that I neither could find any way to be angry and so be robbed of his company, nor had I any means of winning him over.
For I knew well that he was far more invulnerable to money on every side than Ajax to iron, and in the one thing by which I thought he could be caught, he had escaped me.
So I was at a loss, and I went about enslaved by the man as no one has ever been by anyone else.
All this had already happened to me, and after it we served together on the campaign to Potidaea and messed together there.
First of all, then, in hardships he was superior not only to me but to everyone else — whenever we were cut off somewhere and forced to go without food, as happens on campaign, the others were nothing compared to him in holding out — and yet in the feasts he alone was able to enjoy himself, above all in drinking: he was unwilling, but whenever he was compelled, he outdrank everyone, and, what is most amazing of all, no human being has ever seen Socrates drunk.
And of this, it seems to me, the proof will come this very evening.
Then again, as to his feats of endurance in winter — and the winters there are terrible — he did marvels, in particular once, when there was the most terrible frost, and everyone either would not go outdoors, or, if anyone did go out, they wrapped themselves in an amazing quantity of clothing and put on shoes and bound their feet in felt and fleeces — this man went out among them wearing a cloak of just the kind he had always been used to wear before, and barefoot he made his way over the ice more easily than the others did in their shoes; and the soldiers looked at him with suspicion, as though he were despising them.
So much, then, for that;
but what a deed the strong man did and endured there once on campaign is worth hearing.
For having fallen into some train of thought, he stood there from dawn considering it, and when it would not come out for him, he did not give up but stood there searching.
By now it was midday, and the men noticed, and in amazement one told another that Socrates had been standing there since dawn thinking something over.
At last some of the Ionians, when evening came, after they had dined — for it was summer then — carried out their bedding and slept in the cool, and at the same time kept watch on him, to see whether he would go on standing through the night as well.
And he stood there until dawn came and the sun rose;
then he went off on his way, after saying a prayer to the sun.
And if you like, take him in battles — for it is only just to render him this due — when the battle took place after which the generals gave me the prize for valour, no man alive saved me but he: he refused to abandon me when I was wounded, but brought off both my arms and my very self.
And I, Socrates, urged the generals even then to give the prize for valour to you — and here at least you will neither find fault with me nor say that I am lying;
but when the generals, with an eye to my rank, wanted to give the prize to me, you yourself were more eager than the generals that I should take it rather than yourself.
Further still, gentlemen, Socrates was a sight worth seeing when the army was retreating in rout from Delium;
for I happened to be present on horseback, while he was on foot in hoplite armour.
So he was retreating, when the men were already scattered, he and Laches together;
and I come upon them, and the moment I saw them I called out to the pair of them to take heart, and said that I would not abandon them.
There indeed I had an even finer view of Socrates than at Potidaea — for I myself was less afraid, because I was on horseback — first, in how far he surpassed Laches in keeping his composure;
and then it seemed to me, Aristophanes — to borrow that phrase of yours — that there too he was making his way exactly as he does here, 'swaggering and casting his eyes from side to side,' calmly keeping watch on friends and enemies alike, making it plain to everyone, even from a great distance, that if anyone laid a hand on this man, he would defend himself most stoutly.
And that is why he got away safely, both he and his comrade;
for in war they hardly ever so much as touch men who bear themselves like that, but pursue instead those who flee headlong.
Well then, there are many other marvellous things too that one could find to praise in Socrates;
but while for his other pursuits one might perhaps say the like of someone else as well, his being like no human being at all, none of the ancients and none of those now living — that deserves every wonder.
For such as Achilles was, one might liken Brasidas and others to him; and such as Pericles was, again, Nestor and Antenor — and there are others too — and in the same way one might liken all the rest.
But such as this man here has proved in his strangeness, both himself and his talk, one would not come near finding however one searched, among men of today or of old — unless perhaps one likened him to those I speak of: to no human being, but to the silens and satyrs, him and his talk alike.
And in fact this too I left out at the beginning, that his talk as well is exactly like those silenus figures that open up.
For if one were willing to listen to Socrates' talk, it would seem utterly ridiculous at first;
such are the words and phrases it is wrapped in on the outside — the very hide of some insolent satyr.
For he talks of pack-asses and blacksmiths and cobblers and tanners, and he seems always to be saying the same things in the same words, so that any inexperienced and foolish man would laugh his talk to scorn.
But if one sees his discourses opened up and gets inside them, one will find, first, that they alone of all talk have sense within them, and then that they are most divine, holding in themselves the greatest number of images of virtue and reaching to the greatest range — or rather to everything it is proper to consider for the man who means to become noble and good.
This, gentlemen, is what I praise in Socrates;
and again, mixing in what I blame, I have told you the outrages he did me.
And indeed he has done this not to me alone, but also to Charmides son of Glaucon and Euthydemus son of Diocles and very many others, whom this man deceives, playing the lover, and then sets himself up rather as the beloved instead of the lover.
And this is just what I say to you too, Agathon: do not be deceived by this man, but learn from our sufferings and be on your guard, and do not, as the proverb has it, learn like the fool by suffering.
When Alcibiades had said this, he said, there was laughter at his frankness, because he seemed to be still in love with Socrates.
Then Socrates said, You seem sober to me, Alcibiades.
For otherwise you would never have tried, wrapping it round so elegantly in a circle, to hide why you said all this, tucking it in at the end as if speaking by the way — as though you had not said the whole of it for this one purpose, to set me and Agathon at odds, thinking that I must love you and no one else, and that Agathon must be loved by you and by not a single other.
But you were not unnoticed: this satyr-play of yours, this Silenus-drama, has been found out.
Well, dear Agathon, let him gain nothing by it; make ready so that no one sets me and you at odds.
Then Agathon said, And really, Socrates, you may well be speaking the truth.
I take as evidence, too, how he lay down between me and you, so as to hold us apart.
So he shall gain nothing by it; I will come over and recline beside you.
By all means, said Socrates; come recline here, below me.
O Zeus, said Alcibiades, what I suffer once again at this man's hands!
He thinks he must get the better of me at every turn.
But if nothing else, you astonishing man, let Agathon lie between us.
Impossible, said Socrates.
For you praised me, and I in my turn must praise the man on my right.
So if Agathon reclines below you, surely he will not praise me all over again, instead of rather being praised by me?
Let it be, my extraordinary friend, and do not grudge the young man his praise from me;
for I very much long to deliver his encomium.
Hurrah, hurrah! said Agathon; Alcibiades, there is no way I can stay here — more than anything I shall change my place, so that I may be praised by Socrates.
There it is, said Alcibiades, the usual thing:
when Socrates is present it is impossible for anyone else to get a share of the beauties.
And now how readily he has found a plausible argument for having this boy recline beside him!
So Agathon rose, meaning to lie down beside Socrates;
but suddenly a great crowd of revellers came to the doors, and finding them open — someone was just going out — they marched straight in among the company and lay down, and everything was full of uproar, and, no longer in any kind of order, they were forced to drink an enormous quantity of wine.
Aristodemus said that Eryximachus and Phaedrus and some others then went off and left, while he himself was seized by sleep and slept a very long time, since the nights were long, and woke toward day when the cocks were already crowing; and on waking he saw that the others were asleep or gone, but that Agathon and Aristophanes and Socrates alone were still awake, and drinking from a great bowl, passing it to the right.
So Socrates was conversing with them;
and the rest of the talk Aristodemus said he did not remember — for he had not been there from the beginning and was drowsing — but the main point, he said, was that Socrates was pressing them to agree that it belongs to the same man to know how to compose comedy and tragedy, and that he who is a tragic poet by art is a comic poet as well.
Being forced to this and not following very closely, they were nodding off; and Aristophanes fell asleep first, and then, when day was already breaking, Agathon.
So Socrates, having put them to sleep, got up and went away — and he himself, as was his habit, followed — and coming to the Lyceum he washed, and spent the day as he would any other day, and having so spent it, toward evening he went home to rest.
