Now, senators, so that I may avert and deflect from myself a certain almost just complaint of the fatherland, listen carefully, I beg you, to what I shall say, and commit it deep in your hearts and minds.
For if the fatherland, which is much dearer to me than my own life, if all Italy, if the whole state were to speak with me: 'Marcus Tullius, what are you doing?
Will you allow him to leave, the man whom you have found to be an enemy, whom you see will be the leader of the war, whom you perceive is awaited as commander in the enemy camp, the instigator of the crime, the head of the conspiracy, the man who called out slaves and ruined citizens, so that he will seem not to have been sent out of the city by you, but sent into the city?
Will you not order him to be led into chains, not to be hurried to death, not to be sacrificed with the ultimate penalty?
What, pray, is stopping you? The custom of our ancestors?
But very often in this state even private citizens have punished dangerous citizens with death.
Or the laws which have been passed concerning the punishment of Roman citizens?
But never in this city have those who revolted from the state kept the rights of citizens.
Or do you fear the ill will of posterity? A fine way indeed to repay the Roman people, who raised you, a man known only through yourself, with no recommendation from ancestors, so early to the highest power through all the grades of office, if because of ill will or fear of some danger you neglect the safety of your fellow citizens.
But if there is any fear of ill will, the ill will caused by severity and courage is not to be feared more strongly than that caused by inaction and worthlessness.
Or, when Italy is laid waste by war, when cities are harried, when houses are burning, do you not think that then you will be consumed by a blaze of ill will?'
To these most sacred words of the state, and to the minds of those men who think the same, I will make a brief reply.
If I judged this the best thing to do, senators, that Catiline be punished with death, I would not have given that gladiator the use of a single hour to live.
For if the greatest men and most distinguished citizens not only did not pollute themselves with the blood of Saturninus and the Gracchi and Flaccus and many earlier men, but even gained honour by it, I certainly had no need to fear that, if this murderer of citizens were killed, any ill will would overflow onto me in time to come.
But even if it were threatening me most seriously, I have still always been of the mind that I considered ill will earned by virtue to be glory, not ill will.
