And yet, what am I saying? That anything should break you, that you should ever reform yourself, that you should contemplate any flight, that you should think of any exile?
If only the immortal gods would give you that intention!
And yet I see, if you, terrified by my words, make up your mind to go into exile, how great a storm of ill will threatens me, if not at the present time, while the memory of your crimes is fresh, then at least in time to come.
But it is worth it, provided that this disaster of yours is a private one and is separated from the dangers to the state.
But that you should be moved by your vices, that you should fear the penalties of the laws, that you should yield to the crisis of the state, is not something to be asked for.
For you are not the kind of man, Catiline, whom either shame has ever called back from disgrace, or fear from danger, or reason from madness.
Therefore, as I have often said already, set out, and if you want to stir up ill will against me, your enemy, as you proclaim, go straight into exile; I will hardly bear the talk of people if you do that, I will hardly sustain the weight of that ill will if you go into exile at the consul's command.
But if you prefer to serve my praise and glory, go out with your savage band of criminals, betake yourself to Manlius, rouse the desperate citizens, separate yourself from the good, bring war upon your fatherland, exult in impious brigandage, so that you may seem to have gone not driven out by me to strangers, but invited to your own people.
And yet why should I invite you, when I know that men have already been sent ahead by you to wait for you under arms at Forum Aurelium, when I know that a day has been agreed and fixed with Manlius, when I know that even that silver eagle, which I trust will be ruinous and deadly to you and all your men, and for which a shrine of crime was set up in your house, has been sent ahead by you?
That you could do without it any longer, the eagle you used to worship when setting out to murder, from whose altars you often transferred that impious right hand of yours to the slaughter of citizens?
You will go at last, at long last, where that unbridled and frenzied desire of yours has long been dragging you; for this affair brings you no pain, but a kind of unbelievable pleasure.
For this madness nature bore you, your will trained you, fortune preserved you.
Never have you desired not only peace, but not even war, unless it was a criminal war.
You have found a band of scoundrels, scraped together from the ruined and from those abandoned not only by all fortune but even by hope.
What delight you will enjoy there, with what joys you will exult, in what pleasure you will revel, when in so great a number of your men you will neither hear nor see a single good man!
Those famous labours of yours were practice for pursuing this way of life: lying on the ground not only to lie in wait for an illicit affair but also to carry out a crime, staying awake not only plotting against the sleep of husbands but also against the goods of peaceful citizens.
You have a place to show off that splendid endurance of yours of hunger, cold, and lack of all things, by which you will soon feel yourself worn out.
I achieved this much when I kept you from the consulship: that you could attack the state as an exile rather than harass it as consul, and that what you had criminally undertaken would be called brigandage rather than war.
