But now what is this life of yours? For I will now speak to you in such a way that I seem moved not by hatred, as I ought to be, but by pity, of which none is owed to you.
You came into the senate a little while ago. Who out of this great crowd, out of so many of your friends and connections, greeted you?
If this has happened to no one within human memory, are you waiting for an insult in words, when you have been crushed by the most damning verdict of silence?
And what of the fact that at your arrival those benches were emptied, that all the ex-consuls, whom you had very often marked out for slaughter, left that part of the benches bare and empty as soon as you sat down: with what feelings, tell me, do you think you should bear this?
By Hercules, if my slaves feared me the way all your fellow citizens fear you, I would think I had to leave my house: do you not think you have to leave the city?
And if I saw myself so seriously suspected and resented by my fellow citizens, even unjustly, I would rather be deprived of the sight of the citizens than be looked at by everyone's hostile eyes: you, although in the awareness of your crimes you recognise that everyone's hatred is just and long owed to you, do you hesitate to avoid the sight and presence of those whose minds and feelings you are wounding?
If your parents feared and hated you and you could not placate them by any means, you would, I think, withdraw somewhere out of their sight.
Now your fatherland, which is the common parent of us all, hates and fears you and has long judged that you are thinking of nothing but her murder: will you neither respect her authority nor follow her judgement nor fear her power?
She pleads with you like this, Catiline, and though silent, in a way speaks: for some years now no crime has come about except through you, no outrage without you; for you alone the killing of many citizens, for you the harassing and plundering of the allies went unpunished and free; you have been strong enough not only to disregard laws and courts but even to overturn and smash them.
Those earlier things, although they should not have been endured, I nevertheless endured as best I could; but now that I am wholly in fear because of you alone, that at every sound Catiline is feared, that no plot can seemingly be formed against me that is foreign to your wickedness: this is not to be endured.
Therefore depart and take this fear away from me: if it is well-founded, so that I am not crushed; if it is false, so that at long last I may stop being afraid.
If your fatherland spoke to you like this, as I said, ought she not to obtain her request, even if she could not use force?
What of the fact that you gave yourself into custody, that to avoid suspicion you said you wanted to live at the house of Manius Lepidus?
Not taken in by him, you even dared to come to me, and asked me to keep you under guard in my house.
When you had received from me too the answer that I could in no way be safe with you within the same house walls, since I was in great danger already because we were enclosed within the same city walls, you went to the praetor Quintus Metellus.
Rejected by him, you moved in with your comrade, that excellent man Marcus Metellus, whom you evidently thought would be most diligent in guarding you, most shrewd in suspecting and most brave in punishing.
But how far from prison and chains should a man seemingly be, who has already judged himself worthy of custody?
