And yet there are some in this order who either do not see what is threatening or pretend not to see what they do see; who have nourished Catiline's hope with soft proposals and strengthened the growing conspiracy by not believing in it; and on their authority many, not only wicked men but also ignorant ones, would say, if I had punished him, that it had been done cruelly and like a king.
Now I understand that if that man reaches the camp of Manlius, where he is heading, no one will be so stupid as not to see that a conspiracy has been formed, no one so wicked as not to admit it.
But I understand that if this one man is killed, this plague of the state can be checked for a little while, but not suppressed for ever.
But if he throws himself out and leads his men out with him and gathers in the same place the other shipwrecked men collected from everywhere, then not only this so fully grown plague of the state will be extinguished and destroyed, but also the root and seed of all evils.
For a long time now, senators, we have been living amid these dangers and plots of conspiracy, but somehow the ripeness of all crimes and of long-standing madness and recklessness has burst out in the time of my consulship.
Now if from such a great gang of brigands this one man is removed, we shall perhaps seem to be relieved of care and fear for some short time, but the danger will remain and will be shut up deep in the veins and vital organs of the state.
Just as men who are sick with a serious illness, when they are tossed about with heat and fever, often seem at first to be relieved if they drink cold water, but then are afflicted much more seriously and violently, so this disease which is in the state, relieved by the punishment of that man, will grow more violently worse while the rest remain alive.
Therefore let the wicked withdraw, let them separate themselves from the good, let them gather in one place, let them, in short, be separated from us by a wall, as I have often said already; let them stop plotting against the consul in his own home, surrounding the tribunal of the city praetor, besieging the senate house with swords, preparing fire-darts and torches to set the city ablaze; let it, in short, be written on the forehead of each one what he thinks about the state.
I promise you this, senators: there will be such great diligence in us consuls, such great authority in you, such great courage in the Roman knights, such great unity among all good men, that with Catiline's departure you will see everything revealed, brought to light, crushed and punished.
With these omens, Catiline, for the supreme safety of the state, for your own ruin and destruction, and for the death of those who have joined themselves with you in every crime and murder, set out for your impious and wicked war.
You, Jupiter, who were established by Romulus under the same auspices as this city, whom we truly call the Stayer of this city and empire, you will keep this man and his allies away from your temples and the others, from the houses and walls of the city, from the lives and fortunes of all citizens; and these men, enemies of the good, foes of the fatherland, brigands of Italy, joined together by a pact of crimes and a wicked alliance, you will punish with eternal punishments, living and dead.
