Surely you do not hesitate to do at my command what you were already doing of your own accord?
The consul orders an enemy to leave the city. You ask me: into exile?
I do not order it, but, if you ask my advice, I recommend it. For what is there, Catiline, that can still give you pleasure in this city?
In it there is no one, outside that conspiracy of ruined men, who does not fear you, no one who does not hate you.
What brand of private disgrace has not been burned onto your life?
What scandal in your personal affairs does not cling to your reputation?
What lust has ever been absent from your eyes, what crime from your hands, what outrage from your whole body?
What young man whom you had ensnared with the lures of corruption have you not led on, carrying before him either a sword for his recklessness or a torch for his lust?
And what else? Recently, when by the death of your previous wife you had made room for a new marriage, did you not pile another incredible crime on top of that crime?
This I pass over and gladly allow to be kept silent, so that it may not seem that in this state the monstrousness of so great a crime either occurred or went unpunished.
I pass over the collapse of your fortunes, which you will feel all hanging over you on the coming Ides: I come to those things which concern not the private disgrace of your vices, not your domestic difficulties and shame, but the highest interests of the state and the life and safety of us all.
Can this daylight, Catiline, or the air of this sky be pleasant to you, when you know that there is no one of these men who does not know that on the 31st of December, in the consulship of Lepidus and Tullus, you stood in the place of assembly with a weapon, that you had got a band ready to kill the consuls and the leading men of the state, and that it was not any change of heart or fear on your part but the Fortune of the Roman people that stood in the way of your crime and madness?
And I now leave those things aside — for they are neither obscure nor were few crimes committed afterwards — how often you tried to kill me as consul-elect, how often as consul!
How many of your thrusts, aimed so that they seemed impossible to avoid, I have escaped by a slight swerve and, as they say, with my body!
You achieve nothing, you gain nothing, and yet you do not stop trying and wanting.
How often already has that dagger of yours been wrenched from your hands, how often has it dropped by some chance and slipped away!
With what rites it was consecrated and dedicated by you I do not know, that you think it necessary to plunge it into the body of a consul.
