I will give you strong evidence of this, not words but what you value: deeds.
Listen then to what happened to me, so that you may know that I would not give way to anyone against what is just out of fear of death, but would rather die than give way.
What I will tell you is vulgar and the stuff of the lawcourts, but true.
For I, men of Athens, have never held any other office in the city, but I did serve on the Council;
and it happened that our tribe, Antiochis, was presiding when you decided to try as a group the ten generals who had not picked up the men from the sea battle, unlawfully, as you all later agreed.
Then I alone of the presiding councillors opposed you, so that you would do nothing against the laws, and I voted against it;
and though the orators were ready to denounce me and have me arrested, and you were urging them on and shouting, I thought that I should rather run the risk on the side of the law and of justice than side with you when you were planning what was unjust, out of fear of prison or death.
And that was while the city was still a democracy;
but when the oligarchy came, the Thirty in their turn summoned me and four others to the Tholos and ordered us to bring Leon of Salamis from Salamis to be put to death, just the sort of orders they gave to many others too, wanting to implicate as many people as possible in their crimes.
Then, however, I showed again, not by words but by deed, that I do not care about death — if it were not too crude to say so — one bit, but that not doing anything unjust or unholy, that is all I care about.
For that regime, powerful as it was, did not frighten me into doing anything unjust; when we came out of the Tholos, the other four went off to Salamis and brought Leon back, but I went off home.
And perhaps I would have been put to death for this, if the regime had not been overthrown soon afterwards.
And there will be many witnesses to these things for you.
Do you think, then, that I would have survived so many years if I had been active in public affairs and, acting as a good man should, had come to the aid of what is just and, as one must, had made this my highest priority?
Far from it, men of Athens;
nor would any other man.
