For if someone arrives in Hades, rid of these people here who claim to be judges, and finds the true judges, who are said to sit in judgement there, Minos and Rhadamanthus and Aeacus and Triptolemus and all the other demigods who were just in their own lives, would that be a poor journey?
Or again, what would any of you give to be with Orpheus and Musaeus and Hesiod and Homer?
I, for one, am willing to die many times over if this is true.
For me in particular it would be a wonderful way to spend my time there, whenever I met Palamedes and Ajax son of Telamon and any other of the ancients who died because of an unjust verdict, and compared my experiences with theirs — that, I think, would not be unpleasant — and, greatest of all, to spend my time examining and questioning the people there as I do those here, to see which of them is wise and which thinks he is but is not.
What would one give, gentlemen of the jury, to examine the man who led the great army against Troy, or Odysseus, or Sisyphus, or countless others one could name, men and women, whom it would be an unimaginable happiness to talk with and be with and examine there?
Surely the people there do not put anyone to death for that;
for the people there are happier than those here in other respects too, and from now on they are immortal for the rest of time, if what we are told is true.
But you too, gentlemen of the jury, must be of good hope about death, and keep this one truth in mind: that no evil can befall a good man, either in life or after death, and that his affairs are not neglected by the gods;
nor has what is happening to me now come about by chance; it is clear to me that it was now better for me to die and be released from my troubles.
That is why the sign did not turn me back at any point, and why I am not at all angry with those who voted to condemn me or with my accusers.
And yet it was not with this in mind that they condemned and accused me, but thinking they were harming me;
for this they deserve to be blamed.
This much, however, I ask of them:
when my sons grow up, punish them, gentlemen, by troubling them in the very same way I troubled you, if they seem to you to care for money or anything else before virtue; and if they think they are something when they are nothing, reproach them as I reproached you, for not caring for what they should, and for thinking they are something when they are worth nothing.
And if you do this, I shall have received justice from you, both I myself and my sons.
But now it is time to go away, I to die, you to live;
which of us is going to the better thing is unclear to everyone except the god.
