For to you, as my friends, I want to show what this thing that has happened to me now really means.
For to me, gentlemen of the jury — and in calling you judges I would be calling you rightly — something remarkable has happened.
My customary prophetic voice, the voice of the divine sign, was always very frequent in all my previous life, opposing me even in very small matters if I was about to do something wrong.
But now there has happened to me what you yourselves see, the thing that one might think, and that is generally held, to be the worst of evils;
yet the god's sign did not oppose me when I left home this morning, nor when I came up here to the court, nor at any point in my speech when I was about to say something.
And yet in other discussions it has often stopped me in the middle of what I was saying;
but now, in this whole affair, it has nowhere opposed me in anything I did or said.
What, then, do I take to be the reason?
I will tell you:
it looks as if what has happened to me is a good thing, and those of us who think that being dead is an evil cannot possibly be right.
I have had strong evidence of this:
my customary sign would certainly have opposed me if I had not been about to do something good.
Let us consider in this way too how much reason there is to hope that it is a good thing.
For being dead is one of two things:
either it is like being nothing, and the dead man has no perception of anything at all, or, as we are told, it is a kind of change and relocation of the soul from this place here to another place.
And if there is no perception, but it is like a sleep in which the sleeper does not see even a dream, death would be a wonderful gain — for I think that if someone had to pick out the night in which he slept so soundly that he did not even dream, and set against that night the other nights and days of his own life, and then had to consider and say how many days and nights in his own life he has lived better and more pleasantly than that night, I think that not just some private person but the Great King himself would find them easy to count compared with the other days and nights — so if death is like that, I call it a gain;
for then all of time seems no longer than a single night.
But if death is like a journey from here to another place, and what we are told is true, that all the dead are there, what greater good could there be than this, gentlemen of the jury?
