And by the Dog, men of Athens— for I must tell you the truth— this, I swear, is what happened to me:
as I searched at the god’s bidding, those with the highest reputation seemed to me nearly the most deficient, while others, thought to be inferior, seemed better men when it came to good sense.
I must show you my wanderings, then, like someone performing labours, so that the oracle might prove to be irrefutable for me.
For after the politicians I went to the poets, the writers of tragedies and of dithyrambs and the rest, expecting that there I would catch myself red-handed being more ignorant than they were.
So I would take up those of their poems which seemed to me to have been most carefully worked by them, and ask them what they meant, so that at the same time I might also learn something from them.
I am ashamed to tell you the truth, gentlemen;
but still, it must be told.
For practically everyone present would have spoken better than they did about the poems they themselves had composed.
So about the poets too I soon realised this: that they did not compose what they composed by wisdom, but by some natural gift and in a state of inspiration, like seers and oracle-singers;
for these too say many fine things, but know nothing of what they say.
The poets too seemed to me to be in some such condition, and at the same time I noticed that because of their poetry they thought they were the wisest of men in other things as well, which they were not.
So I left there too, thinking I had the advantage of them in the same way as over the politicians.
Finally I went to the craftsmen;
for I was aware that I knew practically nothing, and I knew that I would find them knowing many fine things.
And in this I was not mistaken: they knew things that I did not know, and in that respect they were wiser than me.
But, men of Athens, the good craftsmen seemed to me to have the same failing as the poets— because he practised his craft well, each thought himself very wise in the other, most important things too— and this error of theirs obscured that wisdom;
so that I asked myself on behalf of the oracle whether I would rather be as I am, neither wise with their wisdom nor ignorant with their ignorance, or have both the things they have.
So I answered myself and the oracle that it was better for me to be as I am.
