As for my not being indignant, men of Athens, at what has happened here, that you have voted to condemn me, many things contribute to that, and in particular this outcome was not unexpected to me; what surprises me much more is the number of votes cast on each side.
For I did not think it would be so close, but that the margin would be wide.
As it is, it seems, if only thirty votes had gone the other way, I would have been acquitted.
So as far as Meletus is concerned, it seems to me, I have been acquitted even now, and not only acquitted: this at least is clear to everyone, that if Anytus and Lycon had not come up to accuse me, he would even have been fined a thousand drachmas, for failing to get a fifth of the votes.
Anyway, the man proposes death as my penalty.
Very well.
And what counter-penalty shall I propose to you, men of Athens?
Or is it obvious: what I deserve?
What, then?
What do I deserve to suffer or to pay, because all my life I did not keep quiet, but neglected what most people care about — making money and managing a household, generalships and speeches to the Assembly and the other offices, and the conspiracies and factions that spring up in the city — since I thought myself really too decent a man to survive if I went in for those things; so I did not go where I would be of no use either to you or to myself, but went instead where I could privately do each of you the greatest service, as I claim, trying to persuade each of you not to care for any of his possessions before he had cared for himself, how he might be as good and as wise as possible, nor for the city's affairs before the city itself, and to care for everything else in the same way — what, then, do I deserve to suffer, being such a man?
Something good, men of Athens, if the penalty must truly be set according to what one deserves;
and a good thing, moreover, of the kind that would suit me.
So what suits a poor man, a benefactor, who needs leisure to exhort you?
There is nothing more fitting, men of Athens, than for such a man to be given free meals in the Prytaneum — far more fitting than for any of you who has won at Olympia with a single horse or a pair or a four-horse team;
for he makes you seem happy, whereas I make you happy; and he has no need of maintenance, whereas I do.
