He is like someone who has made up a riddle to test me: 'Will Socrates the wise realise that I am joking and contradicting myself, or shall I fool him and the others who are listening?'
For he seems to me to contradict himself in the indictment, as if he were to say:
Socrates is guilty of not believing in gods, but of believing in gods.
And that is the talk of a man playing games.
Consider with me, then, gentlemen, how he appears to me to be saying this;
And you, Meletus, answer us.
And you, as I asked you at the start, remember not to make a noise if I conduct my argument in my usual way.
Is there anyone, Meletus, who believes that human things exist, but does not believe in human beings?
Let him answer, gentlemen, and not keep making a fuss about one thing and another;
Is there anyone who does not believe in horses, but believes in horse-related things?
Or does not believe that flute-players exist, but believes in flute-playing?
There is no one, best of men;
if you don't want to answer, I'll say it for you and for these others here.
But answer the next one at least:
Is there anyone who believes that spiritual things exist, but does not believe in spirits?
There is not.
How kind of you to answer, grudgingly, compelled by these men.
So you say that I believe in and teach spiritual things, whether new or old; at any rate I believe in spiritual things by your own account, and you swore to that in your indictment.
And if I believe in spiritual things, surely I must necessarily believe in spirits too;
Isn't that so?
It is;
I take it you agree, since you don't answer.
And don't we regard spirits as either gods or children of gods?
Do you agree or not?
Certainly.
Then if I believe in spirits, as you say, and if spirits are gods of a kind, this would be what I mean by your riddling and joking: saying that I, who do not believe in gods, believe in gods after all, since I believe in spirits;
and if, on the other hand, spirits are bastard children of gods, by nymphs or by some other mothers, as they are indeed said to be, who in the world would believe that there are children of gods, but no gods?
It would be just as absurd as if someone believed in the offspring of horses and donkeys, namely mules, but did not believe that horses and donkeys exist.
No, Meletus, there is no way you wrote this indictment except to test us, or because you were at a loss for a real wrong to charge me with;
but there is no way you could persuade anyone with even a little sense that one and the same man can believe in spiritual and divine things, and yet the same man believe in neither spirits nor gods nor heroes.
