Very well;
I must make my defence, then, men of Athens, and try to remove from you in so short a time this slander which you have held for so long.
I would like this to happen so, if it is in any way better both for you and for me, and to achieve something by my defence;
but I think it is difficult, and I am well aware of what it involves.
Still, let this go as the god pleases; the law must be obeyed and a defence made.
Let us take up from the beginning, then, what the accusation is from which the slander against me has arisen, the slander Meletus trusted when he brought this indictment against me.
Very well;
what exactly did the slanderers say when they slandered me?
I must read out their sworn statement as if they were formal accusers:
“Socrates is guilty of wrongdoing and busies himself investigating things beneath the earth and in the heavens, making the weaker argument the stronger and teaching others these same things.”
It goes something like that;
for you have seen these things yourselves in Aristophanes’ comedy: a certain Socrates being swung around there, claiming that he walks on air and talking a lot of other nonsense, about which I understand nothing, great or small.
And I do not say this to belittle such knowledge, if anyone is wise about such things— I hope I may never have to defend myself against so many charges from Meletus!— but the fact is, men of Athens, that I have no part in these things.
Again, I offer most of you as witnesses, and I ask you to inform and tell one another, all of you who have ever heard me in conversation— and there are many such among you— tell one another, then, whether any of you ever heard me discussing such things, briefly or at length, and from this you will recognise that the other things most people say about me are of the same kind.
But none of this is so, and if you have heard from anyone that I try to educate people and charge money for it, that is not true either.
Though this too seems to me a fine thing, if one is able to educate people like Gorgias of Leontini and Prodicus of Ceos and Hippias of Elis.
