But in fact, men of Athens, that I am not guilty under Meletus' indictment does not seem to me to need much of a defence; what I have said is enough.
But what I was saying earlier too, that a great deal of hostility has arisen against me, and among many people, you can be sure that it is true.
And this is what will convict me, if anything does: not Meletus, nor Anytus, but the slander and envy of the many.
These have convicted many other good men too, and I think they will go on doing so;
there is no danger that it will stop with me.
Perhaps someone might then say:
“Are you not ashamed, Socrates, of having followed the kind of pursuit that now puts you in danger of death?”
And to him I would give a just reply: “You are not speaking well, sir, if you think that a man who is of even the slightest use should weigh up the risk of living or dying, and not consider only this, whenever he acts: whether he is doing right or wrong, and the deeds of a good man or a bad one.”
For by your argument the demigods who died at Troy would be worthless, the others and especially the son of Thetis, who so despised danger compared with enduring anything shameful that, when he was eager to kill Hector and his mother, a goddess, spoke to him, saying something like this, I believe:
“My child, if you avenge the killing of your comrade Patroclus and kill Hector, you will die yourself — ‘for straight after Hector,’ she says, ‘your doom is ready’ —” he, hearing this, made light of death and danger, and fearing far more to live as a coward and not avenge his friends, “‘Straight away,’ he says, ‘let me die, once I have punished the wrongdoer, so that I do not stay here, a laughing-stock beside the curved ships, a burden on the earth.’”
You don't suppose that he gave any thought to death and danger?
For this is how things stand, men of Athens, in truth:
wherever someone has stationed himself, thinking it best, or has been stationed by his commander, there, it seems to me, he must stay and face the danger, taking into account neither death nor anything else before disgrace.
So I would have done something terrible, men of Athens, if, when the commanders you elected to command me stationed me, at Potidaea and Amphipolis and at Delium, I stayed where they posted me like anyone else and risked death, but when the god stationed me, as I thought and understood, ordering me to live doing philosophy and examining myself and others, I then deserted my post out of fear of death or of anything else whatever.
