But throughout my whole life, in public, if I ever did anything, I will be seen to be this kind of man, and in private the very same, never having conceded anything against justice to anyone, neither to anyone else nor to any of those whom my slanderers call my students.
But I have never been anyone's teacher;
but if anyone, young or old, wanted to hear me talking and going about my own business, I never begrudged it to anyone, nor do I talk when I get money and not when I don't; I make myself available to rich and poor alike to ask me questions, and, if anyone wishes, to answer and hear what I have to say.
And whether any of these turns out good or not, I could not justly be held responsible, since I never promised any of them any instruction, nor taught them any;
and if anyone says that he ever learned or heard anything from me in private that all the others did not, you can be sure that he is not telling the truth.
But why is it, then, that some people enjoy spending so much time with me?
You have heard, men of Athens; I have told you the whole truth:
they enjoy hearing people examined who think they are wise but are not.
For it is not unpleasant.
But for me, as I say, this has been commanded by the god, through oracles and through dreams and in every way in which any other divine dispensation has ever commanded a human being to do anything at all.
These things, men of Athens, are both true and easy to test.
For if I am corrupting some of the young and have corrupted others, then surely, if any of them, having grown older, realised that I had once given them bad advice when they were young, they should now come up here themselves to accuse me and take revenge;
and if they themselves were unwilling, then some of their relatives, fathers and brothers and other kinsmen, if their family members had suffered any harm from me, should now remember it and take revenge.
In any case many of them are present here, whom I can see: first Crito here, my contemporary and fellow demesman, father of Critobulus here; then Lysanias of Sphettus, father of Aeschines here; and also Antiphon of Cephisia here, the father of Epigenes; and then these others, whose brothers have spent time in this pursuit: Nicostratus son of Theozotides, brother of Theodotus — and Theodotus has died, so he at least could not have begged him to keep quiet — and Paralius here, son of Demodocus, whose brother was Theages;
and here is Adimantus son of Ariston, whose brother is Plato here, and Aeantodorus, whose brother is Apollodorus here.
And I can name many others for you, some one of whom Meletus should above all have produced as a witness during his own speech;
and if he forgot then, let him produce one now — I yield the floor — and let him say whether he has any such witness.
But you will find quite the opposite, gentlemen: that they are all ready to help me, the corrupter, the one who does harm to their relatives, as Meletus and Anytus claim.
The corrupted themselves might perhaps have a reason for helping me;
but the uncorrupted, men already older, their relatives, what other reason do they have for helping me except the right and just one, that they know Meletus is lying and I am telling the truth?
