Well then, gentlemen:
what I would have to say in my defence is more or less this, and perhaps other things of the same kind.
But perhaps one of you might be indignant when he remembers his own case, if he, fighting a case even less serious than this one, begged and implored the jurors with many tears, bringing up his little children to win as much pity as possible, and many others of his family and friends, while I, it seems, will do none of these things, even though I am facing, as it might seem, the ultimate danger.
Perhaps someone, reflecting on this, might then harden himself against me and, angered by this very thing, cast his vote in anger.
If any of you feels this way — I do not expect it, but if so — I think I would be speaking reasonably to him if I said: “My excellent friend, I too have some family, I suppose;
for, in Homer's very words, I too was not born ‘from oak or from rock’ but from human beings, so I have family, and sons too, men of Athens, three of them, one already a lad, two still small children;
but all the same I will not bring any of them up here to beg you to acquit me.”
Why then will I do none of these things?
Not out of arrogance, men of Athens, nor out of disrespect for you; whether I face death with confidence or not is another matter, but as far as reputation goes, for me and for you and for the whole city, it does not seem right to me to do any of these things, at my age and with the name I have, whether true or false; at any rate it is commonly held that Socrates is different from most people.
So if those of you who are thought to excel, whether in wisdom or courage or any other virtue, behave like that, it would be shameful;
that is how I have often seen some people behave when they are on trial: they are thought to be somebody, yet they carry on astonishingly, as if they thought something terrible would happen to them if they died, as though they would be immortal if you did not kill them;
they seem to me to bring shame on the city, so that even a foreigner might suppose that those Athenians who excel in virtue, whom the Athenians themselves choose over themselves for offices and other honours, are no better than women.
For these things, men of Athens, neither should you do, you who are thought to be anybody at all, nor, if we do them, should you allow it; instead you should make this very thing clear, that you will far sooner condemn the man who stages these pitiful dramas and makes the city a laughing-stock than the man who keeps quiet.
Apart from reputation, gentlemen, it does not seem right to me to beg the juror, nor to get off by begging, but to inform and persuade him.
For the juror does not sit for this purpose, to hand out justice as a favour, but to judge it;
and he has sworn not to do favours to whomever he pleases, but to judge according to the laws.
So we must not get you into the habit of breaking your oath, nor must you get into the habit;
for neither of us would then be acting piously.
So do not expect me, men of Athens, to do such things before you as I consider neither honourable nor just nor holy, above all, by Zeus, when I am being prosecuted for impiety by Meletus here.
For clearly, if I were to persuade you and by my begging force you, when you have sworn an oath, I would be teaching you not to believe that gods exist, and in making my defence I would simply be accusing myself of not believing in gods.
But that is far from the case;
for I do believe in them, men of Athens, as none of my accusers does, and I leave it to you and to the god to judge my case in whatever way will be best for me and for you.
