For the sake of no great length of time, men of Athens, you will get the name and the blame, from those who want to disparage the city, of having killed Socrates, a wise man — for those who want to reproach you will say I am wise, even if I am not — at any rate, if you had waited a little while, this would have come to you of its own accord;
for you see my age: I am already far along in life and close to death.
I say this not to all of you, but to those who voted for my death.
And I say this too to these same people.
Perhaps you think, men of Athens, that I have been convicted for lack of the kind of arguments with which I could have persuaded you, if I had thought I ought to do and say anything at all to get off.
Far from it.
No, I have been convicted for a lack, but not of words: of boldness and shamelessness and of willingness to say to you the sort of things you would most have liked to hear — me wailing and lamenting and doing and saying many other things unworthy of me, as I say, the sort of things you are used to hearing from others.
But neither did I think then that I should do anything unworthy of a free man because of the danger, nor do I now regret having defended myself in this way; I much prefer to die after such a defence than to live after the other kind.
For neither in court nor in war should I or anyone else scheme to escape death by doing anything at all.
Indeed in battle it often becomes clear that one could escape death by throwing down one's weapons and turning to beg for mercy from one's pursuers;
and there are many other devices in every kind of danger for escaping death, if one is prepared to do and say anything.
But perhaps that is not what is difficult, gentlemen, escaping death; escaping wickedness is much harder;
for it runs faster than death.
And now I, being slow and old, have been caught by the slower one, while my accusers, being clever and quick, have been caught by the faster, wickedness.
And now I go away, condemned by you to pay the penalty of death, while they have been convicted by the truth of depravity and injustice.
And I abide by my penalty, and they by theirs.
Perhaps things had to turn out this way, and I think they are as they should be.
What comes next I want to prophesy to you, you who voted to condemn me;
for I am now at the point at which men most often prophesy: when they are about to die.
For I tell you, you men who have killed me, that punishment will come upon you immediately after my death, far harsher, by Zeus, than the one you have inflicted on me by killing me;
for now you have done this thinking you will be rid of having to give an account of your lives, but it will turn out quite the opposite for you, as I say.
There will be more people calling you to account, whom I have been holding back until now, though you did not notice;
and they will be harsher, the younger they are, and you will be more annoyed.
For if you think that by killing people you will stop anyone from reproaching you for not living rightly, you are not thinking well;
for that way of getting free is neither really possible nor honourable; the finest and easiest way is this: not to cut others down, but to prepare oneself to be as good as possible.
So with this prophecy to you who voted to condemn me, I take my leave of you.
But with those who voted to acquit me I would gladly talk about what has happened here, while the magistrates are busy and I am not yet going to the place where I must die when I get there.
So stay with me, gentlemen, for that long;
for nothing prevents us from talking things over with one another while we still may.
