So if I must propose a penalty that justly matches what I deserve, this is what I propose: free meals in the Prytaneum.
Perhaps, then, in saying this too I seem to you to be speaking much as I did about pity and pleading: out of arrogance.
But it is not like that, men of Athens; it is rather like this.
I am convinced that I never willingly wrong any human being, but I cannot convince you of this;
for we have talked with one another only a short time.
For I think that if you had a law, as other people do, that capital cases should be decided not in a single day but over many, you would have been convinced;
as it is, it is not easy to clear away great slanders in a short time.
Convinced, then, that I wrong no one, I am far from going to wrong myself, and to say against myself that I deserve something bad, and to propose some such penalty for myself.
Out of fear of what?
That I might suffer what Meletus proposes for me, when I say I do not know whether it is good or bad?
Instead of that, am I to choose something I know well to be bad, and propose that as my penalty?
Imprisonment?
And why should I live in prison, a slave to whoever holds office at the time, the Eleven?
A fine, then, and imprisonment until I pay it?
But for me that comes to the same thing as what I was just saying;
for I have no money to pay it with.
Well then, shall I propose exile?
For perhaps you would accept that as my penalty.
I would certainly be in the grip of a great love of life, men of Athens, if I were so irrational as not to be able to work out that you, my own fellow citizens, could not bear my ways and my discussions, but they have become too heavy and too hateful for you, so that you are now looking to be rid of them;
will others, then, bear them easily?
Far from it, men of Athens.
A fine life it would be for me, then, a man of my age, to go into exile and live moving from one city to another and being driven out of each.
For I know well that wherever I go, the young will listen to me when I speak, just as they do here;
and if I drive them away, they will get me driven out themselves by persuading their elders;
and if I do not drive them away, their fathers and relatives will drive me out on their account.
Perhaps, then, someone might say:
"But Socrates, can't you just leave us and live somewhere keeping silent and quiet?"
This is the hardest thing of all to convince some of you of.
