So King Xerxes was encamped in Trachis in the land of Malis, and the Greeks in the pass.
This place is called Thermopylae by most of the Greeks, but by the locals and those who live round about it is called Pylae.
So both sides were encamped in these places, and the one controlled everything that lies to the north as far as Trachis, the others everything that stretches towards the south and midday on this side of the mainland.
The Greeks who awaited the Persian in this place were these: three hundred Spartiate hoplites, a thousand Tegeans and Mantineans, half from each, a hundred and twenty from Orchomenus in Arcadia, and a thousand from the rest of Arcadia;
so many of the Arcadians; and from Corinth four hundred, from Phlius two hundred, and eighty from Mycenae.
These were present from the Peloponnese; from Boeotia there were seven hundred Thespians and four hundred Thebans.
Besides these, the Opuntian Locrians had been summoned with their whole force, and a thousand Phocians.
For the Greeks themselves had called them in, saying through messengers that they themselves had come as an advance guard for the rest, that the remaining allies were expected any day, that the sea was under guard, watched by the Athenians, the Aeginetans and those assigned to the fleet, and that they had nothing to fear;
for it was not a god who was invading Greece but a man, and there was no mortal, nor ever would be, into whose lot misfortune had not been mixed from his birth, and the greatest misfortunes for the greatest of them.
So the invader too, being mortal, was bound to fall from his high hopes.
When they heard this, they came to help at Trachis.
These troops had other generals too, city by city, but the one most admired and the leader of the whole army was the Lacedaemonian Leonidas, son of Anaxandridas, son of Leon, son of Eurycratidas, son of Anaxandrus, son of Eurycrates, son of Polydorus, son of Alcamenes, son of Teleclus, son of Archelaus, son of Hegesilaus, son of Doryssus, son of Leobotas, son of Echestratus, son of Agis, son of Eurysthenes, son of Aristodemus, son of Aristomachus, son of Cleodaeus, son of Hyllus, son of Heracles; he had gained the kingship at Sparta unexpectedly.
