Cyrus took to heart what Croesus had said;
he sent the others away and asked Croesus what he saw amiss in what was being done.
Croesus said, “Since the gods have given me to you as a slave, I think it right, if I see further than others, to point it out to you.
The Persians are by nature insolent, and they are poor.
So if you allow them to plunder and keep great riches, this is what you may expect from them:
whichever of them gets hold of the most, expect him to rise in revolt against you.
So now do as follows, if what I say pleases you:
post some of your spearmen as guards at every gate, and let them take the goods from those carrying them out, saying that a tenth of it must by necessity be given to Zeus.
In this way you will not make yourself hated by them for taking the goods by force, and they, recognising that you are acting justly, will give them up willingly.”
When Cyrus heard this he was delighted, because he thought the advice was good;
he praised him warmly, ordered his spearmen to carry out what Croesus had advised, and then spoke to Croesus as follows.
“Croesus, since you, a man who is a king, are ready to do good deeds and speak good words, ask for whatever gift you wish to be given you at once.”
He said, “Master, you will please me most if you allow me to send these fetters to the god of the Greeks, whom I honoured above all other gods, and ask him whether it is his custom to deceive those who treat him well.”
Cyrus asked him what charge he was making against the god that led him to ask this.
Croesus went over for him again his whole plan, the answers of the oracles and above all his offerings, and how he had been encouraged by the oracle to march against the Persians;
and as he told this, he came back again to his request that he be allowed to reproach the god with it.
Cyrus laughed and said, “You shall have this from me, Croesus, and anything else you may need at any time.”
When Croesus heard this, he sent some Lydians to Delphi, instructing them to lay the fetters on the threshold of the temple and ask the god whether he was not ashamed of having encouraged Croesus by his oracles to march against the Persians in the belief that he would put an end to Cyrus's power, from which such first-fruits had come to him, and to show him the fetters;
they were to ask him this, and also whether it was the custom of the Greek gods to be ungrateful.
