The Persians took Sardis and captured Croesus himself alive, after he had reigned for fourteen years and been besieged for fourteen days, and had brought his own great empire to an end, as the oracle had said.
The Persians took him and brought him before Cyrus.
Cyrus heaped up a great pyre and made Croesus, bound in fetters, go up onto it, and beside him twice seven sons of the Lydians; he had it in mind either to offer them to some god as the first fruits of his spoils, or perhaps he wished to fulfil a vow, or perhaps, having learned that Croesus was god-fearing, he made him go up onto the pyre for this reason, wanting to know whether any of the divine powers would rescue him from being burned alive.
So Cyrus, they say, was doing this;
and to Croesus, as he stood on the pyre, even though he was in such great misfortune, there came the saying of Solon, that it had been spoken by him with divine guidance: that no one among the living is blessed.
And when this came to him, he sighed, groaned aloud after a long silence, and three times called out the name “Solon”.
Cyrus heard it and ordered the interpreters to ask Croesus whom he was calling on, and they came up and asked him;
for a while Croesus kept silent when he was asked, but afterwards, when he was compelled, he said: “A man whom I would have given great sums of money for all rulers to meet and talk with.”
Since what he told them was unclear, they asked again what he meant.
As they pressed him and pestered him, he told them how Solon, an Athenian, had once come to him, and having seen all his wealth had made light of it, saying such and such things, and how everything had turned out for him just as Solon had said, though he had spoken no more about Croesus himself than about all mankind, and especially about those who think themselves blessed.
So Croesus told this story, and meanwhile the pyre had been lit and its outer edges were burning.
And Cyrus, hearing from the interpreters what Croesus had said, changed his mind; he reflected that he, a man himself, was giving another man, who had been no less prosperous than he, alive to the fire, and besides he feared retribution and considered that nothing in human affairs is secure, so he ordered them to put out the burning fire as quickly as possible and to bring down Croesus and those with him.
But those who tried could no longer master the fire.
