After him spoke Achaemenes, who was Xerxes' brother and commander of the fleet; he happened to be present at the conversation and feared that Xerxes might be persuaded to do this. “My king,” he said, “I see you accepting the words of a man who envies your success, or who is even betraying your cause.
For that is just the sort of behaviour the Greeks delight in:
they envy good fortune and hate what is stronger.
If, in our present circumstances, when four hundred of our ships have been wrecked, you send away another three hundred from the camp to sail round the Peloponnese, your opponents will become a match for you;
but if the fleet stays together it is hard for them to deal with, and they will not be a match for you at all; the whole fleet will support the army, and the army the fleet, as they advance together.
But if you split them up, you will be of no use to them, nor they to you.
My advice is that you should set your own affairs in good order and not concern yourself with those of the enemy: where they will make their stand, what they will do, and how many they are.
For they are well able to look after themselves, and we likewise after ourselves.
And if the Lacedaemonians march out to battle against the Persians, they will do nothing to heal the wound they have now.”
Xerxes replied with these words.
“Achaemenes, I think you speak well, and I will do this.
Demaratus says what he believes is best for me, but his judgement is worse than yours.
For I will certainly not accept that he is ill-disposed towards my affairs, judging both by what he said before and by the fact of the matter: that a citizen envies a fellow citizen's success and is his enemy in silence, and that when a townsman asks his advice, a citizen would not suggest what seems best to him, unless he had risen far in virtue;
and such men are rare.
But a guest-friend is the most well-disposed of all towards a guest-friend who prospers, and if asked for advice he would give the best advice.
So I order everyone from now on to refrain from speaking ill of Demaratus, since he is my guest-friend.”
Having said this, Xerxes went through the dead, and when he came to Leonidas, having heard that he was king and general of the Lacedaemonians, he ordered them to cut off his head and impale it on a stake.
It is clear to me from many other proofs, and not least from this one, that King Xerxes was more enraged with Leonidas while he lived than with any other man;
for otherwise he would never have committed this outrage against his corpse, since of all the peoples I know, the Persians are the most accustomed to honour men who are brave in war.
So those who had been ordered to do this did it.
