For all he said, he did not convince Xerxes. The king let four days go by, expecting all the while that they would run away;
but on the fifth, since they did not leave but seemed to him to be staying out of sheer impudence and folly, he flew into a rage and sent the Medes and the Cissians against them, ordering them to take the men alive and bring them before his eyes.
When the Medes charged headlong into the Greeks, many of them fell, but others took their place; and they were not driven off, though they suffered heavy losses.
They made it plain to everyone, and not least to the king himself, that he had many human beings but few men.
The fighting went on all day.
When the Medes had been roughly handled, they withdrew, and the Persians took over and attacked in their place: those the king called the Immortals, commanded by Hydarnes, in the belief that these at least would finish the task with ease.
But when these too came to grips with the Greeks, they fared no better than the Median force, but just the same, since they were fighting in a narrow place, using shorter spears than the Greeks, and unable to make use of their numbers.
The Lacedaemonians fought in a way worth telling, showing in many ways that they were experts in fighting among men who were not; in particular, whenever they turned their backs, they would all flee together in pretence, and the barbarians, seeing them flee, would come on with shouting and clatter; then, just as they were being overtaken, the Spartans would wheel round to face the barbarians, and in turning they would cut down countless numbers of the Persians;
and of the Spartiates themselves only a few fell there.
Since the Persians could gain no part of the pass, though they tried it by divisions and attacked in every possible way, they drew back.
During these assaults of the battle, it is said, the king, as he watched, leapt up from his throne three times in fear for his army.
So they fought on that day; and on the next the barbarians fared no better in the contest.
For they joined battle expecting that, since the Greeks were few, they would be covered in wounds and no longer able to raise a hand against them.
But the Greeks were drawn up by companies and by peoples, and each fought in turn, except the Phocians;
these had been posted on the mountain to guard the path.
When the Persians found nothing different from what they had seen the day before, they drew back.
