It is said that two of these three hundred, Eurytus and Aristodemus, could have agreed together either to get safely home to Sparta, since they had been dismissed from the camp by Leonidas and were lying at Alpeni with the worst kind of eye disease, or, if they did not wish to return home, to die with the others; but though they could have done either of these things, they would not agree, and differing in judgement, Eurytus, when he learned of the Persians' way round, asked for his armour, put it on and ordered his helot to lead him to the fighting men, and when the helot had brought him there, the man who led him ran away, while Eurytus plunged into the throng and was killed; but Aristodemus lost heart and stayed behind.
Now if Aristodemus alone had fallen ill and returned to Sparta, or if they had both made the journey home together, the Spartiates, in my opinion, would not have been angry with them at all;
but as it was, since one of them had perished and the other, who had the same excuse, had been unwilling to die, they were bound to be greatly angry with Aristodemus.
Some say that Aristodemus got safely back to Sparta in this way and with such an excuse; others that he had been sent from the camp as a messenger, and although he could have arrived in time for the battle, he chose not to, but lingered on the road and so survived, while his fellow messenger reached the battle and was killed.
When Aristodemus returned to Lacedaemon he met with reproach and disgrace;
his disgrace consisted in this:
no Spartiate would give him a light for his fire or speak with him.
And he was reproached by being called Aristodemus the Trembler.
But at the battle of Plataea he made up for all the blame brought against him.
It is said too that another of these three hundred survived because he had been sent as a messenger to Thessaly, a man whose name was Pantites;
when he returned to Sparta and found himself disgraced, he hanged himself.
The Thebans, whose general was Leontiades, as long as they were with the Greeks, fought against the King's army under compulsion;
but when they saw the Persian side gaining the upper hand, then, while the Greeks with Leonidas were hurrying to the hillock, they broke away from them, stretched out their hands and approached the barbarians, telling the truest of all stories: that they were on the side of the Medes, that they had been among the first to give earth and water to the King, that they had come to Thermopylae under compulsion, and that they were not to blame for the harm done to the King.
So by saying this they saved their lives;
for they also had the Thessalians as witnesses to their story.
Yet they were not lucky in everything;
for when they came and the barbarians took them, some were killed as they approached, and most of them, at Xerxes' command, were branded with the royal marks, beginning with their general Leontiades;
his son Eurymachus was later killed by the Plataeans when he led four hundred Thebans and seized the town of Plataea.
