They came to a place which was named Gethsemane. He said to his disciples, "Sit here, while I pray."
He took with him Peter, James, and John, and began to be greatly troubled and distressed.
He said to them, "My soul is exceedingly sorrowful, even to death. Stay here, and watch."
He went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed that, if it were possible, the hour might pass away from him.
He said, "Abba, Father, all things are possible to you. Please remove this cup from me. However, not what I desire, but what you desire."
He came and found them sleeping, and said to Peter, "Simon, are you sleeping? Couldn't you watch one hour?
Watch and pray, that you not enter into temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak."
Again he went away, and prayed, saying the same words.
Again he returned, and found them sleeping, for their eyes were very heavy, and they didn't know what to answer him.
He came the third time, and said to them, "Sleep on now, and take your rest. It is enough. The hour has come. Behold, the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
Arise, let us be going. Behold, he who betrays me is at hand."
Immediately, while he was still speaking, Judas, one of the twelve, came -- and with him a multitude with swords and clubs, from the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders.
Now he who betrayed him had given them a sign, saying, "Whoever I will kiss, that is he. Seize him, and lead him away safely."
When he had come, immediately he came to him, and said, "Rabbi! Rabbi!" and kissed him.
They laid their hands on him, and seized him.
But a certain one of those who stood by drew his sword, and struck the servant of the high priest, and cut off his ear.
Jesus answered them, "Have you come out, as against a robber, with swords and clubs to seize me?
I was daily with you in the temple teaching, and you didn't arrest me. But this is so that the Scriptures might be fulfilled."
They all left him, and fled.
A certain young man followed him, having a linen cloth thrown around himself, over his naked body. The young men grabbed him,
but he left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked.
