They went into Capernaum, and immediately on the Sabbath day he entered into the synagogue and taught.
They were astonished at his teaching, for he taught them as having authority, and not as the scribes.
Immediately there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit, and he cried out,
saying, "Ha! What do we have to do with you, Jesus, you Nazarene? Have you come to destroy us? I know you who you are: the Holy One of God!"
Jesus rebuked him, saying, "Be quiet, and come out of him!"
The unclean spirit, convulsing him and crying with a loud voice, came out of him.
They were all amazed, so that they questioned among themselves, saying, "What is this? A new teaching? For with authority he commands even the unclean spirits, and they obey him!"
The report of him went out immediately everywhere into all the region of Galilee and its surrounding area.
Immediately, when they had come out of the synagogue, they came into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.
Now Simon's wife's mother lay sick with a fever, and immediately they told him about her.
He came and took her by the hand, and raised her up. The fever left her, and she served them.
At evening, when the sun had set, they brought to him all who were sick, and those who were possessed by demons.
All the city was gathered together at the door.
He healed many who were sick with various diseases, and cast out many demons. He didn't allow the demons to speak, because they knew him.
Early in the night, he rose up and went out, and departed into a deserted place, and prayed there.
Simon and those who were with him followed after him;
and they found him, and told him, "Everyone is looking for you."
He said to them, "Let's go elsewhere into the next towns, that I may preach there also, because for this reason I came forth."
He went into their synagogues throughout all Galilee, preaching and casting out demons.
There came to him a leper, begging him, kneeling down to him, and saying to him, "If you want to, you can make me clean."
Being moved with compassion, he stretched out his hand, and touched him, and said to him, "I want to. Be made clean."
When he had said this, immediately the leprosy departed from him, and he was made clean.
He strictly warned him, and immediately sent him out,
and said to him, "See you say nothing to anybody, but go show yourself to the priest, and offer for your cleansing the things which Moses commanded, for a testimony to them."
But he went out, and began to proclaim it much, and to spread about the matter, so that Jesus could no more openly enter into a city, but was outside in desert places: and they came to him from everywhere.
