And meanwhile, what did the passengers do?
There you would have seen a wretched scene: the sailors singing the Salve Regina were imploring the Virgin Mother, calling her Star of the Sea, Queen of Heaven, Lady of the World, Haven of Salvation, and flattering her with many other titles which Holy Scripture nowhere gives her.
What has she to do with the sea, when she never went sailing, I believe?
Once Venus looked after sailors, because she was believed to have been born from the sea: since she stopped caring for them, the Virgin Mother has been put in the place of this mother who was no virgin.
You're joking.
Some, lying face down on the planks, worshipped the sea, pouring whatever oil there was onto the waves, flattering it just as we flatter an angry prince.
What did they say?
“O most merciful sea, O most generous sea, O richest sea, O most beautiful sea, grow calm, save us!” Many things of this sort they chanted to the deaf sea.
Ridiculous superstition. What did the others do?
Some did nothing but vomit; most made vows. There was an Englishman who promised mountains of gold to the Virgin of Walsingham if he reached land alive. Others promised much to the wood of the Cross that was in such-and-such a place; others again, to the one in some other place.
The same was done with the Virgin Mary, who reigns in many places; and they think a vow is void unless you specify the place.
Ridiculous: as if the saints did not dwell in heaven.
There were some who promised to become Carthusians. There was one who pledged to visit St James, who lives at Compostela, barefoot and bareheaded, his body covered only by an iron coat of mail, and living on begged food besides.
Did nobody remember Christopher?
I heard one, and could not help laughing, who in a loud voice, so as to be sure of being heard, promised Christopher, who stands at the top of the church in Paris, more a mountain than a statue, a wax candle as big as himself.
While he kept hammering this home, shouting as loud as he could, an acquaintance who happened to be standing next to him nudged him with his elbow and quietly warned him: “Watch what you're promising: even if you auctioned off everything you own, you couldn't pay.”
Then the man, in a voice now lower, so of course that Christopher should not hear, said: “Shut up, you fool; do you think I mean it? Once I touch land, I'm not going to give him so much as a tallow candle.”
What a thick head! I suspect he was a Hollander.
No; but he was a Zeelander.
