I'm surprised nobody thought of the Apostle Paul, who once went to sea himself, and when the ship was wrecked jumped down onto land. For he, no stranger to misfortune, learned to help the wretched.
There was no mention of Paul.
Were they praying meanwhile?
Vying with each other. One sang the Salve Regina, another the Credo in Deum. Some had certain special little prayers, not unlike magic spells, against dangers.
How affliction makes people devout! When things go well neither God nor any saint comes into our minds. And what were you doing meanwhile? Didn't you make vows to any of the saints?
Not at all.
Why so?
Because I don't strike bargains with the saints. For what else is it but a contract on the formula “I give if you do”, or “I will do if you do”: “I'll give a candle if I swim ashore”, “I'll go to Rome if you save me”?
But you did call on some saint for protection?
Not even that.
And why not?
Because heaven is a big place. If I entrust my safety to some saint, say St Peter, who will perhaps hear first because he stands at the door, then before he meets God, before he sets out my case, I shall already have perished.
So what did you do?
I went straight to the Father himself, saying “Our Father, who art in heaven.” None of the saints hears sooner than he does, or grants more gladly what is asked.
But didn't your conscience protest meanwhile? Weren't you afraid to call on a father you had offended with so many sins?
To be frank, my conscience did hold me back a little; but I soon took heart again, thinking to myself: “No father is so angry with his son that, if he saw him in danger in a torrent or a lake, he would not seize him by the hair and haul him out onto the bank.”
Of them all, nobody behaved more calmly than a certain woman who had a little baby at her breast, which she was suckling.
What did she do?
She alone neither shrieked, nor wept, nor made promises: she simply held her little boy close and prayed in silence. Meanwhile, as the ship kept striking the shoals, the captain, afraid it would break up entirely, bound it round with cables from bow to stern.
What wretched protection!
