Perhaps those customs suit the French; I prefer the customs of Germany, as being manly.
I have never had the chance to see Germany: so please, do not mind telling me how they receive a guest.
Whether the manner of treatment is the same everywhere, I do not know: I shall tell what I saw. Nobody greets you when you arrive, so that they may not seem to be touting for guests. For they think that mean and servile, and unworthy of German sternness.
When you have shouted for a long time, at last someone puts his head out through the little window of the stove-room (for they live in these almost until midsummer), just as a tortoise peeps out of its shell. He is the one you must ask whether you may lodge there.
If he does not refuse, you understand that there is room. When you ask where the stable is, he points it out with a wave of the hand. There you may look after your horse in your own way. For no servant lifts a hand.
If the inn is a busier one, a servant there points out the stable, and a place for the horse that is least convenient too. For they keep the better ones for later arrivals, especially noblemen. If you complain about anything, you straight away hear: “If you don't like it, look for another inn.”
In the towns they supply hay grudgingly and very sparingly, and they sell it not much cheaper than the oats themselves. When the horse has been seen to, you move bag and baggage into the stove-room, with your boots, your luggage, your mud; it is one room, common to all.
In France they assign bedrooms, where people can undress, clean themselves, warm up, or even rest if they like.
Here there is nothing of the kind. In the stove-room you take off your boots; you put on your shoes; you change your shirt, if you want; you hang your rain-soaked clothes next to the stove; you move up close yourself to get dry.
There is water ready too, if you want to wash your hands, but usually so clean that afterwards you have to look for other water to wash off that washing.
I praise men not made soft by any luxuries.
But if you arrive at four in the afternoon, you still will not dine before nine, and sometimes ten.
Why is that?
They prepare nothing until they see everyone there, so that all can be served with the same effort.
They are looking for a short cut.
You've got it. So often eighty or ninety people gather in the same stove-room: men on foot, horsemen, merchants, sailors, carters, farmers, boys, women, the healthy, the sick.
That really is a monastery: a common life.
