One man is combing his hair there, another wiping off sweat, another cleaning his rawhide shoes or boots, another belching garlic. In short? The confusion of tongues and persons there is no less than it once was at the tower of Babel.
And if they catch sight of anyone from a foreign nation whose dress shows some sign of rank, they all fix their eyes intently on him, staring, as if some new kind of animal had been brought from Africa; so much so that even after they have sat down to table, they twist their faces round over their shoulders, keep looking at him, and never take their eyes off him, forgetting their food.
In Rome, Paris and Venice nobody marvels at anything.
Meanwhile you must on no account ask for anything. When it is already late in the evening, and no more arrivals are expected, out comes an old servant, with a grey beard, cropped head, grim face and dirty clothes.
Men like that ought to be cupbearers to the Roman cardinals.
Casting his eyes around, he silently counts how many are in the stove-room; the more he sees there, the more fiercely the stove is stoked, even if the sun is otherwise oppressive with its heat. With them it is the chief part of good hospitality if everybody is dripping with sweat.
If someone not used to the fug opens a crack of the window so as not to suffocate, he immediately hears: “Shut it!” If you answer: “I can't stand it,” you hear: “Then look for another inn.”
And yet nothing seems to me more dangerous than for so many people to breathe the same air, especially with their pores opened, and to take their food here and stay for several hours.
For I pass over the garlic belches, the breaking of wind, the rotten breath: there are many who suffer from hidden diseases, and there is no disease that is not contagious. Certainly most have the Spanish scab, or, as some call it, the French, though it is common to all nations.
From these men, I think, the danger is not much less than from lepers. Now you guess how much risk there is in time of plague.
They are brave men: they laugh at such things and pay them no heed.
But meanwhile they are brave at the risk of many others.
What can you do? They are used to it: and it is the mark of a steadfast mind not to depart from established custom.
And yet twenty-five years ago nothing was more popular among the Brabanters than the public baths: now they are cold everywhere. For the new scab has taught us to keep away.
