But hear the rest. Afterwards that bearded Ganymede comes back and spreads cloths on as many tables as he thinks enough for that number. But, immortal God, how far from Milesian linen! You would say it was hempen canvas pulled down from the yardarms. For he has assigned at least eight guests to each table.
Then those who know the custom of the country sit down wherever each one pleases. For there is no distinction between poor and rich, between master and servant.
That is the old equality which tyranny has now banished from life. That, I think, is how Christ lived with his disciples.
When they have all sat down, that grim Ganymede comes out again and counts his companies once more: soon he returns and sets before each man a wooden platter, and a spoon made of the same silver, then a glass cup: a while later, bread: each man scrapes this clean for himself at leisure, while the porridge is cooking. In this way they sometimes sit for nearly an hour.
Doesn't any of the guests demand food meanwhile?
None who knows the character of the region. At last the wine is served, good God, how far from mellow! Sophists ought to drink no other; such is its subtlety and sharpness.
And if some guest, even offering money privately, asks for another kind of wine to be got from elsewhere, at first they pretend not to hear, but with a face as if they were about to kill you: if you press them, they answer: “So many counts and marquises have stayed here, and not one has complained about my wine: if you don't like it, find yourself another inn.”
For they regard only the nobles of their own nation as human beings, and they display their coats of arms everywhere. So now they have a sop to throw to the barking stomach: soon the dishes arrive in great procession.
The first usually has pieces of bread soaked in meat broth, or, if it is a fish day, in vegetable broth. Then another broth, after that some reboiled meat, or reheated salt fish.
Then some porridge again, soon some more solid food, until, when the stomach is well tamed, they serve roast meat or boiled fish, which you could not altogether despise: but here they are sparing, and whisk it away at once.
In this way they arrange the whole meal, just as playwrights do who mix choruses in among the scenes; so these people alternate sops and porridge. But they take care that the last act is the best.
And that is the mark of a good poet.
Besides, it would be a sin if anyone meanwhile said: “Take this dish away; nobody is eating.” You must sit on till the prescribed time is up, which they measure, I believe, with water-clocks.
At last out comes that bearded man, or the innkeeper himself, differing very little in dress from the servants; he asks whether we are in good spirits. Soon some better wine is brought.
And they love those who drink more freely, although the man who has swallowed the most wine pays no more than the one who has drunk the least.
A wonderful turn of mind in that nation.
