While the sailors struggled with the storm in vain, the captain at last came to us, deathly pale.
That pallor foretells some great disaster.
“Friends,” he said, “I have ceased to be master of my ship; the winds have won: what remains is to place our hope in God, and for each man to prepare himself for the end.”
A truly Scythian sermon!
“But first of all,” he said, “the ship must be lightened; necessity demands it, a hard weapon: better to save our lives at the cost of our goods than to perish together with our goods.” The truth persuaded us: a great many casks full of costly merchandise were thrown into the sea.
That really was making a sacrifice.
There was an Italian on board who had served as envoy to the King of Scotland: he had a chest full of silver vessels, rings, cloth and silk garments.
He was unwilling to strike a bargain with the sea?
No; he wanted either to perish together with his beloved riches or to be saved together with them. So he objected.
What did the captain do?
“As far as we are concerned,” he said, “you would be free to perish alone with your things: but it is not fair that all of us should be endangered for the sake of your chest; otherwise we shall throw you headlong into the sea along with the chest.”
A speech truly worthy of a sailor.
So the Italian too made his sacrifice, calling down many curses on the gods above and below for having entrusted his life to so barbarous an element.
I recognise an Italian voice.
A little later the winds, made not a whit gentler by our gifts, broke the ropes and tore the sails apart.
What a disaster.
Then the sailor came to us again.
To preach another sermon?
He greeted us. “Friends,” he said, “the hour urges each of us to commend himself to God and prepare for death.” Asked by some who were not unskilled in seamanship for how many hours he thought he could keep the ship afloat, he said he could promise nothing, but no longer than three hours.
This sermon was even harsher than the first.
When he had said this, he ordered all the ropes to be cut, and the mast to be sawn off right down to the socket in which it is set, and thrown into the sea together with the yards.
Why that?
Because with the sail gone or torn it was a burden, not a help: all our hope lay in the rudder.
