For if ten minae of food is much for someone to eat and two little, the trainer will not prescribe six minae;
for perhaps this too is much for the one who will take it, or little:
for Milo little, but for the beginner in gymnastic exercises much.
Likewise in the case of running and wrestling.
So then, every knowledgeable person avoids excess and deficiency, but seeks the mean and chooses this — the mean not of the thing itself, but relative to us.
If, then, every science accomplishes its work well in this way, by looking to the mean and bringing its works to this (whence people are accustomed to say of works that are in good condition that nothing can be taken away nor added, since excess and deficiency destroy the good and the mean preserves it, and the good artists, as we say, work with their eye on this);
and virtue is more exact and better than every art, as nature also is — then it would be aimed at the mean.
I mean moral virtue;
for this is concerned with passions and actions, and in these there is excess and deficiency and the mean.
For instance, it is possible to fear and to be confident and to desire and to be angry and to pity, and in general to feel pleasure and pain, both more and less, and both not well;
but to feel them when one ought and at the things one ought and toward the people one ought and for the sake of what one ought and as one ought is the mean and best, which is precisely what belongs to virtue.
Likewise also concerning actions there is excess and deficiency and the mean.
And virtue is concerned with passions and actions, in which excess errs and deficiency is blamed, while the mean is praised and succeeds;
and both these things belong to virtue.
Virtue, then, is a kind of mean state, since it is at least aimed at the mean.
Further, erring is possible in many ways (for the bad belongs to the unlimited, as the Pythagoreans conjectured, and the good to the limited), but succeeding is possible in only one way (and for this reason the one is easy and the other hard — easy to miss the mark, hard to hit it);
and for these reasons, then, excess and deficiency belong to vice, and the mean state to virtue;
for men are good in one way, but bad in all sorts of ways.
Virtue, then, is a state concerned with choice, lying in a mean relative to us,
