determined by reason, and as the person of practical wisdom would determine it.
And it is a mean between two vices, the one according to excess, the other according to deficiency;
and further, in that some of them fall short of and others exceed what is required both in passions and in actions, while virtue both finds and chooses the mean.
Wherefore according to its substance and the definition stating what it is to be, virtue is a mean state, but according to the best and the good it is an extreme.
But not every action nor every passion admits of the mean;
for some have names that straightaway imply badness bound up with them, such as spite, shamelessness, envy, and among actions adultery, theft, murder;
for all these and such things are so called because they themselves are bad, and not their excesses or their deficiencies.
It is never possible, then, to be right concerning them, but always to err;
nor does the well or not well concerning such things lie in committing adultery with the woman one ought, and when and as one ought, but simply to do any of these things is to err.
It is like, then, claiming that concerning acting unjustly and being cowardly and being self-indulgent too there is a mean and an excess and a deficiency;
for in that way there will be a mean of excess and of deficiency, and an excess of excess and a deficiency of deficiency.
But just as of temperance and courage there is no excess and deficiency, because the mean is in a way an extreme, so neither of those things is there a mean nor an excess and deficiency, but however they are done one errs;
for in general there is neither a mean of excess and deficiency, nor an excess and deficiency of a mean.
But this must not only be stated in general, but also be applied to the particular cases.
For among accounts concerning actions, the general ones are more common, but the particular ones are truer;
for actions are concerned with particulars, and it is required that our accounts agree on these.
These, then, must be taken from the chart.
Concerning fears and feelings of confidence, then, courage is the mean;
