for the noble and the advantageous also appear pleasant.
Further, it has grown up with all of us from infancy;
therefore it is hard to rub off this passion, engrained as it is in our life.
And we measure our actions too, some of us more and some less, by pleasure and pain.
For this reason, then, our whole inquiry must be concerned with these;
for to rejoice and to be pained well or badly is no small matter for actions.
Further, it is harder to fight with pleasure than with anger, as Heraclitus says, and it is always concerning the harder thing that both craft and virtue come to be;
for the good is better in this case too.
So that for this reason too the whole business, both for virtue and for political science, is concerned with pleasures and pains;
for he who uses these well will be good, and he who uses them badly bad.
Let it be said, then, that virtue is concerned with pleasures and pains, and that from the things out of which it comes to be, by these it is both increased and destroyed when they are not done in the same way, and that it is active concerning the very things out of which it came to be.
But someone might raise the difficulty, how we can say that men must do just things in order to become just, and temperate things in order to become temperate;
for if they do the just and temperate things, they are already just and temperate, just as, if they do the things of grammar and music, they are grammarians and musicians.
Or is this not so even in the case of the crafts?
For it is possible to do something grammatical both by chance and at another's prompting.
A man will be a grammarian, then, only if he both does something grammatical and does it grammatically;
and this is doing it in accordance with the grammatical knowledge in himself.
Further, the case of the crafts and that of the virtues are not alike;
for the things that come to be by the crafts have their goodness in themselves;
it is enough, then, that these come to be in a certain condition;
but the things that come to be in accordance with the virtues are done justly or temperately not if they themselves are in a certain condition, but only if the one acting also acts being in a certain condition — first, if he acts knowingly, next, if choosing, and choosing them for their own sake, and third, if he acts being also in a firm and unchangeable state.
