so too, then, we become just by doing just acts, temperate by doing temperate acts, and brave by doing brave acts.
What happens in the cities also bears witness to this;
for the lawgivers make the citizens good by habituating them, and this is the wish of every lawgiver, and those who do not do it well miss the mark, and it is in this that a good constitution differs from a bad one.
Further, from the same things and through the same things every virtue both comes into being and is destroyed, and likewise every art;
for it is from playing the lyre that both the good and the bad lyre-players come to be.
And analogously the builders and all the rest;
for from building well they will be good builders, and from building badly, bad ones.
For if this were not so, there would be no need at all of the one who teaches, but all men would have been born good or bad.
So, then, it is also with the virtues;
for by doing the things that occur in our dealings with other men we become, some of us just and others unjust, and by doing the things that occur in fearful situations and being habituated to feel fear or confidence, some become brave and others cowardly.
And likewise it is with the things concerning the appetites and the things concerning fits of anger;
for some become temperate and gentle, others licentious and irascible — the former from conducting themselves in one way in these matters, the latter from conducting themselves in the other.
And so, in one word, the states arise from like activities.
Therefore we must render our activities of a certain quality;
for the states follow in accordance with the differences of these.
It makes no small difference, then, whether we are habituated in this way or in that straight from youth — rather it makes a very great difference, or rather all the difference.
Since, then, the present treatise is not for the sake of contemplation like the others (for we are inquiring not in order that we may know what virtue is, but in order that we may become good, since otherwise there would be no benefit from it), it is necessary to examine the things concerning actions — how we ought to perform them;
for these are authoritative also over the states' coming to be of a certain quality, just as we have said.
That we must act according to the right reason, then, is common ground and let it be assumed — it will be spoken of later, both what the right reason is and how it stands in relation to the other virtues.
