And similarly too in the case of courage;
for by being habituated to despise fearful things and to endure them we become courageous, and having become so we shall be most able to endure the fearful.
But we must take as a sign of the states the pleasure or pain that supervenes on the deeds;
for the man who abstains from bodily pleasures and rejoices in this very thing is temperate, while he who is vexed at it is self-indulgent, and the man who endures terrible things and rejoices, or at least is not pained, is courageous, while he who is pained is a coward.
For moral virtue is concerned with pleasures and pains;
for on account of pleasure we do base things, and on account of pain we abstain from noble ones.
Therefore we must have been brought up in a certain way straight from youth, as Plato says, so as to rejoice and to be pained at the things we ought;
for this is the right education.
Further, if the virtues are concerned with actions and passions, and pleasure and pain follow upon every passion and every action, then for this reason too virtue would be concerned with pleasures and pains.
The punishments that come about through these also indicate it;
for they are a kind of cure, and cures are by nature effected through contraries.
Further, as we said before, every state of soul has its nature relative to and concerned with those things by which it naturally becomes worse and better;
and it is through pleasures and pains that men become base, by pursuing and avoiding these — either those one ought not, or when one ought not, or as one ought not, or in whatever other ways such things are distinguished by reason.
Therefore men even define the virtues as certain states of impassivity and rest;
but not well, because they speak absolutely, and not 'as one ought' and 'as one ought not' and 'when', and whatever else is added.
It is assumed, then, that virtue is the sort of state, concerned with pleasures and pains, that does the best things, and vice the contrary.
And it may become evident to us from the following too that they are concerned with the same things.
For there being three objects of choice and three of avoidance — the noble, the advantageous, the pleasant, and their three contraries, the shameful, the harmful, the painful — concerning all these the good man tends to go right and the bad man to go wrong, but especially concerning pleasure;
for this is common to the animals, and accompanies all the objects of choice;
