there is more opposed in some cases the deficiency and in others the excess, as to courage it is not rashness, which is an excess, but cowardice, which is a deficiency, while to temperance it is not insensibility, which is a lack, but self-indulgence, which is an excess.
So this comes about for two reasons, one drawn from the thing itself;
for because the one extreme is nearer and more like the middle, we set in opposition to it not this one but rather its contrary;
for example, since rashness seems to be more like courage and nearer to it, and cowardice more unlike, we rather set the latter in opposition;
for the things that stand farther from the middle seem to be more contrary.
This, then, is one cause, drawn from the thing itself;
and the other is drawn from ourselves;
for the things toward which we ourselves are somehow more inclined by nature appear more contrary to the middle.
For example, we ourselves are by nature more inclined toward pleasures, and so we are more easily carried toward self-indulgence than toward orderliness.
These, then, we call more contrary — the things toward which our tendency to increase rather runs;
and for this reason self-indulgence, being an excess, is more contrary to temperance.
That moral virtue, then, is a mean, and in what way, and that it is a mean between two vices, the one in the way of excess and the other in the way of deficiency, and that it is such because it aims at the middle in feelings and in actions, has been sufficiently stated.
So it is also hard work to be good.
For in each thing it is hard work to grasp the middle, as finding the middle of a circle is not for everyone but for the one who knows;
so too getting angry is for everyone and easy, as is giving money and spending it;
but to whom, and how much, and when, and for what end, and how — that is no longer for everyone, nor easy;
and for this very reason doing it well is rare and praiseworthy and noble.
So he who aims at the middle must first steer away from what is more contrary, just as Calypso too advises: clear of that smoke and surge keep thou thy ship.
For of the extremes the one is more erring and the other less;
since, then, to hit the middle is extremely hard, on the second voyage, as they say, one must take the least of the evils;
and this will best be done in the way we describe.
