and sometimes we praise the ambitious man and sometimes the unambitious.
For what reason we do this will be stated in what follows;
but now let us speak about the remaining states in the manner already indicated.
Concerning anger too there is an excess, a deficiency, and a mean, and though these are practically nameless, since we call the intermediate man gentle, let us call the mean gentleness;
of the extremes, let the one who exceeds be irascible and his vice irascibility, and the one who falls short a sort of inirascible person, and the deficiency inirascibility.
There are also three other means, which have a certain likeness to one another but differ from one another;
for they are all concerned with association in words and actions, but they differ in that one is concerned with the truth in these, the others with the pleasant;
and of the pleasant, one part is found in play, the other in all the affairs of life.
We must speak, then, about these too, so that we may better see that in all things the mean is praiseworthy, while the extremes are neither praiseworthy nor correct but blameworthy.
Now most of these too are nameless, but we must try, as in the other cases, to make up names ourselves for the sake of clarity and ease of following.
Concerning truth, then, let the intermediate man be called a sort of truthful person and the mean truthfulness, while pretence that exaggerates is boastfulness and the one who has it a boaster, and pretence that understates is mock-modesty and the one who has it mock-modest.
Concerning the pleasant in play, the intermediate man is witty and the disposition wit, the excess is buffoonery and the one who has it a buffoon, while the one who falls short is a sort of boor and his state boorishness;
concerning the remaining kind of the pleasant, that found in life generally, the one who is pleasant as he ought to be is friendly and the mean friendliness, while the one who exceeds, if for no end of his own, is obsequious, but if for his own advantage, a flatterer, and the one who falls short and is unpleasant in everything is a sort of quarrelsome and surly person.
There are also means in the feelings and concerned with the feelings;
for shame is not a virtue, yet the man with a sense of shame is also praised.
For even in these matters one man is said to be intermediate, another to exceed, like the bashful man who is ashamed of everything;
while the one who falls short, or is ashamed of nothing at all, is shameless, and the intermediate man has a proper sense of shame.
