but according to our virtues and vices we are praised or blamed.
Further, we are angered and afraid without choice, but the virtues are certain choices, or not without choice.
In addition to these points, according to the passions we are said to be moved, but according to the virtues and vices we are said not to be moved but to be disposed in a certain way.
For these reasons, then, they are not capacities either;
for we are called neither good nor bad for being simply capable of being affected, nor are we praised or blamed for it;
further, we are capable by nature, but we do not become good or bad by nature;
and we spoke about this before.
If, then, the virtues are neither passions nor capacities, it remains that they are states.
What virtue is in its genus, then, has been stated.
But one must say not only this, that it is a state, but also what sort of state it is.
It must be said, then, that every virtue, of whatever thing it is the virtue, both brings that thing itself into good condition and renders its work well — for example, the virtue of the eye makes both the eye and its work good;
for by the virtue of the eye we see well.
Likewise the virtue of the horse makes a horse good — both good at running and at carrying its rider and at standing firm against the enemy.
If, so, this holds thus in all cases, the virtue of a human being too would be the state from which a human being becomes good and from which he will render his own work well.
How this will be, we have already said; but it will be evident in this way as well, if we consider what sort of thing its nature is.
In everything continuous and divisible, so, it is possible to take the more, the less, and the equal, and these either according to the thing itself or relative to us;
and the equal is a certain mean between excess and deficiency.
By the mean of the thing I mean what stands at an equal distance from each of the extremes, which is one and the same for all; and by the mean relative to us, what neither exceeds nor falls short;
and this is not one, nor the same for all.
For example, if ten is many and two is few, they take six as the mean according to the thing;
for it exceeds and is exceeded by an equal amount;
and this is a mean according to the arithmetical proportion.
But the mean relative to us must not be taken in this way;
