Anchises had finished speaking, and his son and, together with him, the Sibyl
he draws into the middle of the gathering and the murmuring crowd,
and takes his stand on a mound, from where he could scan them all in a long line
as they faced him, and learn the faces of those who came.
Come now: what glory will hereafter follow the Dardanian line,
what descendants of Italian stock are waiting,
illustrious souls, destined to inherit our name,
I shall set out in words, and I shall teach you your destiny.
That young man, you see, who leans on a headless spear,
holds by lot the place nearest the light; he will be the first to rise to the upper air
of heaven, with Italian blood mingled in him:
Silvius, an Alban name, your last-born child,
whom your wife Lavinia will bear to you late, in your old age,
and raise in the woods, a king and father of kings,
through whom our race will rule in Alba Longa.
Next to him is Procas, glory of the Trojan race,
and Capys, and Numitor, and he who will bring you back in name,
Silvius Aeneas, equally outstanding in piety and in arms,
if ever he receives Alba to rule.
What young men! Look what strength they display,
and they wear their temples shaded with the civic oak!
These will set for you Nomentum and Gabii and the city of Fidena,
these will set the citadels of Collatia on the mountains,
Pometii and Castrum Inui and Bola and Cora.
These will be names then; now they are lands without a name.
What is more, the son of Mars will join his grandfather as companion,
Romulus, whom his mother Ilia, of the blood of Assaracus,
will bear. Do you see how the twin crests stand on his head,
and how the father of the gods himself already marks him with his own honour?
Look, my son: under his auspices that glorious Rome
will make her empire equal to the earth, her spirit to Olympus,
and will enclose her seven hills with a single wall,
blessed in her offspring of heroes: just as the Berecyntian mother
rides in her chariot, crowned with towers, through the Phrygian cities,
rejoicing in her offspring of gods, embracing a hundred grandchildren,
all of them dwellers in heaven, all holding the heights above.
