So spoke father Anchises, and as they wondered he adds this:
Look how Marcellus, distinguished by the spoils of honour,
strides forward, and as victor towers over all the men!
He, when a great upheaval throws it into turmoil, the Roman state
will steady; as a horseman he will lay low the Carthaginians and the rebel Gaul,
and hang up a third set of captured arms to father Quirinus.
And at this Aeneas (for he saw walking with him
a young man outstanding in looks and in gleaming armour,
but his brow was hardly joyful and his eyes were downcast):
Who, father, is that who walks beside the man like this as he goes?
His son, or someone from the great line of his descendants?
What a noise of companions around him! What a presence in the man himself!
But black night hovers round his head with a sad shadow.
Then father Anchises began, as tears welled up:
O my son, do not ask about the great grief of your people;
the fates will only show him to the earth, and will not let him
live any longer. Too powerful the Roman race
would have seemed to you, gods above, if these gifts had been its to keep.
How great the groans of men that, to the great city of Mars,
that Field will send! Or what funerals, Tiber, will you see
when you glide past the new-made tomb!
No boy of the Trojan race will raise his Latin
forefathers so high in hope, nor will the land of Romulus ever
boast so much of any son it has raised.
Alas for his devotion, alas for his old-time loyalty, and the right hand
unconquered in war! No one would have faced him unpunished
in his path when armed, whether he went on foot against the enemy
or dug his spurs into the flanks of a foaming horse.
Alas, pitiable boy, if only you could somehow break your harsh fate,
you will be Marcellus. Give me lilies in handfuls,
let me scatter purple flowers, and my descendant's soul
at least heap with these gifts, and perform an empty
duty. So they wander here and there through the whole region,
in the broad fields of air, and survey everything.
And after Anchises had led his son through each of these things
and fired his mind with love of the fame to come,
he then tells the hero of the wars he must next wage,
and teaches him about the Laurentine peoples and the city of Latinus,
and how he may avoid or endure each hardship.
