But who is that far off, marked out by branches of olive,
carrying sacred objects? I recognise the hair and grey chin
of the Roman king who will be the first to found the city on laws,
sent from little Cures and a poor land
into great power. Then will come after him
the one who will break his country's peace and rouse idle
men to arms, Tullus, and, already unused to triumphs,
the columns. Close behind him follows the more boastful Ancus,
even now already rejoicing too much in the breezes of popular favour.
Do you want to see the Tarquin kings too, and the proud soul
of Brutus the avenger, and the fasces won back?
He will be the first to receive a consul's power and the cruel axes,
and, a father, when his sons stir up new wars,
he will call them to punishment for the sake of fair freedom.
Unhappy man, however later generations will regard those deeds:
love of country will win, and a boundless desire for praise.
Look too at the Decii and the Drusi further off, and cruel with the axe
Torquatus, and Camillus bringing back the standards.
But those souls, whom you see shining in matching armour,
in harmony now and as long as night holds them down,
alas, what a war between them, if they reach the light
of life, what battle lines and slaughter they will stir up!
The father-in-law, from the Alpine ramparts and the citadel of Monoecus
descending, the son-in-law drawn up with the armies of the East against him.
No, boys, do not let your minds grow used to such great wars,
and do not turn your country's strong forces against its own vitals;
and you first, you spare them, you who draw your descent from Olympus,
throw the weapons from your hand, my own blood!
That one, after triumphing over Corinth, to the lofty Capitol
will drive his chariot as victor, famed for the Achaeans he has slain.
That one will overthrow Argos and Agamemnon's Mycenae,
and the descendant of Aeacus himself, of the line of Achilles mighty in arms,
avenging his Trojan ancestors and the desecrated temple of Minerva.
Who would leave you unmentioned, great Cato, or you, Cossus?
Who the family of Gracchus, or the pair, two thunderbolts of war,
the Scipios, the ruin of Libya, and, powerful with little,
Fabricius, or you, Serranus, sowing in your furrow?
Where are you hurrying me, tired as I am, Fabii? You are that great Maximus,
the one man who by delaying restores the state to us.
Others will hammer out breathing bronzes more softly,
I do believe it, will draw living faces from marble,
will plead cases better, and the paths of the sky
trace with the rod, and name the rising stars:
you, Roman, remember to rule the peoples with your power
(these will be your arts), and to impose the ways of peace,
to spare the conquered and to war down the proud.
