While he is saying this, she has long been looking at him, turned away,
rolling her eyes this way and that, and she roams over all of him
with silent gaze, and, blazing with anger, she speaks out thus:
"No goddess was your mother, nor was Dardanus the founder of your race,
traitor; no, bristling Caucasus bore you on its hard
crags, and Hyrcanian tigers gave you their udders to suck.
For why do I pretend, or for what greater things am I holding myself back?
Did he groan when I wept? Did he turn his eyes?
Was he overcome and did he shed tears, or did he pity the one who loves him?
What shall I put before what? Now, now neither greatest Juno
nor the Saturnian father looks on these things with fair eyes.
Nowhere is trust safe. Cast up on the shore, destitute,
I took him in, and, mad as I was, gave him a share of my kingdom;
his lost fleet, his companions I brought back from death.
Ah, I am swept along, burning with fury! Now it is the prophet Apollo,
now the oracles of Lycia, now even the messenger of the gods, sent
by Jupiter himself, who brings dreadful orders through the air.
No doubt that is the work of the gods above, that is the care that troubles
their peace! I do not hold you back, nor do I refute your words.
Go, follow Italy with the winds, seek your kingdom across the waves.
I do hope, if the righteous powers can do anything, that in the midst
of the rocks you will drain your punishment to the dregs, and often call on Dido
by name. Though absent, I will pursue you with black fires,
and when cold death has parted my limbs from my soul,
as a ghost I will be present everywhere. You will pay the penalty, wicked man.
I will hear of it, and this news will reach me down among the deepest shades."
With these words she breaks off her speech in the middle, and sick at heart
she flees the open air, and turns and takes herself out of his sight,
leaving him hesitating in fear and preparing to say
many things. Her maids catch her, carry her collapsed limbs
back to her marble chamber, and lay her down on her bed.
