But the queen — who could deceive a lover? —
sensed the deceit in advance, and was the first to catch the coming stir,
fearing everything, even what was safe. That same impious Rumour told her in her frenzy
that the fleet was being armed and the voyage made ready.
She rages, beside herself, and all aflame runs wild through the whole city
like a Bacchant, just as, roused when the sacred emblems are shaken,
a Thyiad raves, when at the cry of Bacchus the triennial
revels spur her on, and Cithaeron calls her by night with its din.
At last she speaks to Aeneas first, with these words:
"Did you really hope, traitor, that you could hide so great
a crime, and slip away from my land without a word?
Does neither our love hold you back, nor the right hand you once gave,
nor Dido, who is going to die a cruel death?
Why, you are even working on your fleet under the winter sky,
and hurrying to set out across the deep in the midst of the north winds,
cruel man? What if you were not seeking foreign fields and unknown
homes, but ancient Troy were still standing:
would Troy be sought with your fleet across the billowing sea?
Is it me you are fleeing? By these tears and by your right hand, I beg you
(since I, poor wretch, have left myself nothing else now),
by our marriage, by the wedding rites we have begun,
if I have ever deserved well of you, or if anything of mine
was ever sweet to you, pity my collapsing house, and that
purpose of yours — I beg you, if there is still any room for prayers — cast it off.
Because of you the Libyan peoples and the Numidian chieftains
hate me, the Tyrians are hostile; because of you, too,
my honour is extinguished, and that by which alone I was reaching the stars,
my former good name. To whom are you leaving me to die, guest?
For this is the only name that remains of 'husband'.
Why do I wait? Until my brother Pygmalion
destroys my walls, or the Gaetulian Iarbas leads me off captive?
If at least I had had some child by you
before your flight, if some little Aeneas were playing
in my hall, who would still bring back your face,
I would not seem to myself utterly deceived and deserted."
