But at Rome consuls, senators and knights rushed headlong into servitude.
The more distinguished a man was, the more false and hurried he was, and with faces arranged so as not to seem glad at the death of the emperor nor too sad at the start of the new reign, they mixed tears with joy, laments with flattery.
Sextus Pompeius and Sextus Appuleius, the consuls, were the first to swear allegiance to Tiberius Caesar, and in their presence Seius Strabo and Gaius Turranius, the former prefect of the praetorian cohorts, the latter of the grain supply; then the senate, the soldiers and the people.
For Tiberius began everything through the consuls, as if the old Republic still existed and he were undecided about ruling: not even the edict by which he summoned the senators to the senate house did he issue except under the heading of the tribunician power he had received under Augustus.
The words of the edict were few and very modest in meaning: he would consult them about honours for his father; he was not leaving the body, and this was the only public duty he was taking upon himself.
But on Augustus' death he had given the watchword to the praetorian cohorts as commander-in-chief; he had sentries, arms and all the other trappings of a court; soldiers escorted him to the forum, soldiers to the senate house.
He sent letters to the armies as if he had already taken over the principate, hesitant nowhere except when he spoke in the senate.
The chief reason was fear that Germanicus, who had so many legions in his hand, vast auxiliary forces of the allies and astonishing popularity with the people, might prefer to hold power rather than wait for it.
He also made a concession to public opinion, so that he would seem to have been called and chosen by the state rather than to have crept in through a wife's intrigues and an old man's adoption.
It was learned later that the hesitation had been put on also to look into the minds of the leading men: for he twisted their words and expressions into charges and stored them away.
