Then the entreaties were turned towards Tiberius. And he spoke in various ways about the greatness of the empire and his own modesty.
Only the mind of the deified Augustus had been equal to so vast a burden: he himself, called by him to share his cares, had learned by experience how hard, how exposed to fortune, was the task of ruling everything.
Therefore, in a state supported by so many distinguished men, they should not hand everything over to one: several would more easily carry out the duties of state by sharing the work.
There was more dignity than sincerity in such a speech; and Tiberius, even in matters he did not want to hide, whether by nature or by habit, always used hesitant and obscure words: but now, as he strove to bury his feelings completely, they became all the more entangled in uncertainty and ambiguity.
But the senators, whose one fear was that they might seem to understand him, poured themselves out in complaints, tears and prayers; they were stretching out their hands to the gods, to the statue of Augustus, to Tiberius' own knees, when he ordered a document to be brought out and read aloud.
It contained the resources of the state: how many citizens and allies were under arms, how many fleets, client kingdoms and provinces there were, the direct and indirect taxes, and the necessary expenditure and handouts.
Augustus had written all this out in his own hand, and had added the advice that the empire should be kept within its boundaries, whether out of fear or out of jealousy is uncertain.
Meanwhile, as the senate sank to the most abject entreaties, Tiberius happened to say that, although he was not equal to the whole state, he would still take on the care of whatever part of it was entrusted to him.
Then Asinius Gallus said: 'I ask you, Caesar, which part of the state you wish to have entrusted to you.'
Taken aback by the unexpected question, he was silent for a moment; then, having collected himself, he replied that it would not at all befit his modesty to choose or to decline any part of something he would rather be excused from altogether.
Gallus in turn (for he had guessed from his face that he had given offence) said that he had not asked the question so that Tiberius would divide what could not be separated, but so that he would be proved by his own admission that the state was one body and must be ruled by the mind of one man.
He added praise of Augustus, and reminded Tiberius himself of his own victories and of all he had done so outstandingly in civilian life over so many years.
But he did not soften his anger by this, since he had long been hated, on the grounds that, having married Vipsania, daughter of Marcus Agrippa, who had once been Tiberius' wife, he was aiming higher than a citizen should and retained the defiance of his father Asinius Pollio.
