The senators' flattery was lavished on Augusta too. Some proposed that she be called 'Parent of her Country', others 'Mother of her Country'; most proposed that 'son of Julia' be added to Caesar's name.
He kept saying that honours for women must be kept within limits and that he would show the same restraint over those offered to himself; but in reality he was anxious and jealous, and took a woman's elevation as a diminution of himself: he would not even allow a lictor to be voted to her, and he vetoed an altar to commemorate the adoption and other things of this kind.
For Germanicus Caesar, however, he requested proconsular imperium, and envoys were sent to convey it to him and at the same time to console him in his grief at the death of Augustus.
The reason why the same was not requested for Drusus was that Drusus was consul designate and present in Rome.
He nominated twelve candidates for the praetorship, the number handed down by Augustus; and when the senate urged him to increase it, he bound himself by oath not to exceed it.
Then for the first time the elections were transferred from the Campus Martius to the senators: for up to that day, although the most important matters were decided at the emperor's discretion, some were still settled by the partisanship of the tribes.
Nor did the people complain at the loss of their right, except in idle grumbling, and the senate, freed from bribery and degrading canvassing, gladly kept it, while Tiberius restricted himself to recommending no more than four candidates, who were to be appointed without rejection or electioneering.
Meanwhile the tribunes of the plebs asked to put on, at their own expense, games which were to be added to the calendar and called the Augustalia after the name of Augustus.
But money was voted from the treasury, and they were allowed to wear triumphal dress in the Circus: riding in a chariot was not permitted.
Later the annual celebration was transferred to the praetor to whom jurisdiction between citizens and foreigners had fallen by lot.
