But only when the crime was complete did Caesar grasp its enormity.
For the rest of the night, at times fixed in silence, more often starting up in terror, and out of his mind, he waited for daylight as if it would bring his destruction.
And at Burrus' prompting, the flattery first of the centurions and tribunes restored his hopes, as they grasped his hand and congratulated him on having escaped an unforeseen danger and his mother's crime.
Then his friends went to the temples, and, once the example had been set, the neighbouring towns of Campania bore witness to their joy with sacrificial victims and deputations: he himself, with the opposite pretence, was mournful, as though resentful of his own survival, and wept over his mother's death.
However, since the face of places does not change as men's faces do, and the oppressive sight of that sea and shore kept confronting him (and there were those who believed that the sound of a trumpet was heard from the surrounding hills, and wailing from his mother's grave), he withdrew to Naples and sent a letter to the senate, the gist of which was that Agerinus, one of Agrippina's most trusted freedmen, had been caught with a sword to kill him, and that she had paid the penalty through her guilty conscience, as the one who had planned the crime.
He added charges from further back: that she had hoped for a share in the empire, and that the praetorian cohorts would swear allegiance to a woman, with the same disgrace for the senate and people; and that after being disappointed, in her hostility to the soldiers, the senators and the common people, she had opposed the donative and the handout, and had contrived dangers for distinguished men.
What great efforts it had cost him to stop her bursting into the senate house and giving answers to foreign nations!
With a sidelong attack on the Claudian period as well, he shifted all the scandals of that regime onto his mother, declaring that her death was due to the good fortune of the state.
For he even told the story of the shipwreck: but who could be found so dull as to believe it was accidental?
Or that a single man with a weapon had been sent by a shipwrecked woman to break through the emperor's cohorts and fleet?
So it was no longer Nero, whose monstrousness outstripped anyone's complaints, but Seneca who was the target of hostile talk, because in such a speech he had written a confession.
