Augustus, moreover, as props for his domination, raised up Claudius Marcellus, his sister's son and still a mere youth, with a priesthood and the curule aedileship, and Marcus Agrippa, of humble birth but a good soldier and his partner in victory, with two consecutive consulships, and soon, when Marcellus died, took him as his son-in-law; his stepsons Tiberius Nero and Claudius Drusus he honoured with the title of imperator, although his own house was still intact at that time.
For he had brought Agrippa's sons Gaius and Lucius into the family of the Caesars, and before they had even put off the boy's toga he had most ardently desired, while pretending to refuse, that they be called Leaders of the Youth and be designated consuls.
When Agrippa had departed this life, and Lucius Caesar on his way to the armies in Spain, and Gaius on his way back from Armenia, weakened by a wound, were carried off by a death hastened by fate or by the treachery of their stepmother Livia, and since Drusus had long been dead Nero was the only stepson left, everything began to turn towards him: he is adopted as son, colleague in power, partner in the tribunician power, and paraded before all the armies, no longer through his mother's hidden arts, as before, but at her open urging.
For she had so bound the aged Augustus to her that he banished his only grandson, Agrippa Postumus, to the island of Planasia, a youth certainly lacking in good qualities and brutishly violent in his physical strength, yet convicted of no crime.
But, by heaven, he put Germanicus, son of Drusus, in command of the eight legions on the Rhine and ordered Tiberius to adopt him, although Tiberius had a grown son in his house, so that he might rest on more safeguards.
At that time no war remained except against the Germans, fought more to wipe out the disgrace of the army lost with Quintilius Varus than out of desire to extend the empire or for any worthwhile reward.
At home all was calm, the magistrates had the same titles; the younger men had been born after the victory at Actium, and even most of the old ones during the civil wars: how many were left who had seen the Republic?
So, with the constitution of the state overturned, there was nothing anywhere left of the old, sound way of life: all men, stripped of equality, looked to the emperor's orders, with no fear for the present, as long as Augustus, vigorous in years, kept himself, his house and the peace secure.
When his advanced old age was also being worn down by a sick body, and the end was near and with it new hopes, a few talked idly of the blessings of liberty, more dreaded war, others longed for it.
By far the largest part picked apart their approaching masters with various rumours: Agrippa was savage and inflamed by his disgrace, not equal in age or experience to so great a burden; Tiberius Nero was mature in years and proven in war, but had the old, ingrained arrogance of the Claudian family, and many signs of cruelty, however much they were suppressed, kept breaking out.
He too had been brought up from earliest infancy in a ruling house; consulships and triumphs had been heaped on him as a young man; even in the years he had spent at Rhodes in exile, under the pretence of retirement, he had brooded on nothing but anger, pretence and secret lusts.
Then there was his mother, with a woman's lack of self-control: they would have to be slaves to a woman and, on top of that, to two young men who would oppress the state for a while and one day tear it apart.
