While people were debating these and similar things, Augustus' health grew worse, and some suspected foul play by his wife.
For a rumour had spread that a few months earlier Augustus, with a chosen few in the secret and with Fabius Maximus as his only companion, had sailed to Planasia to visit Agrippa; that there had been many tears on both sides and signs of affection, and hence hope that the young man would be restored to his grandfather's home: that Maximus had disclosed this to his wife Marcia, and she to Livia.
Caesar had learned of it; and not long afterwards, when Maximus died, it being uncertain whether he had sought his death, Marcia was heard at his funeral lamenting and blaming herself for having been the cause of her husband's ruin.
However that may be, Tiberius had barely entered Illyricum when he was summoned by an urgent letter from his mother; and it is not clearly established whether at the town of Nola he found Augustus still breathing or already dead.
For Livia had sealed off the house and the streets with strict guards, and from time to time favourable bulletins were published, until, once the measures the moment required had been taken, one and the same report announced that Augustus had died and that Nero was in control of affairs.
The first crime of the new principate was the murder of Agrippa Postumus, whom, unaware and unarmed, a centurion, though steeled in spirit, dispatched only with difficulty.
Tiberius said nothing about this matter in the senate: he pretended there were orders from his father, in which he had instructed the tribune assigned to guard Agrippa not to delay in putting him to death as soon as he himself had reached his last day.
Augustus had no doubt made many harsh complaints about the young man's character, and had seen to it that his exile was ratified by a decree of the senate: but he never hardened himself to kill any of his own family, nor was it credible that he had brought death on his grandson for the security of his stepson.
It was nearer the truth that Tiberius and Livia, he out of fear, she out of a stepmother's hatred, had hurried on the murder of the suspected and hated young man.
When the centurion reported, in the military manner, that what he had ordered had been done, he replied that he had given no order and that an account of the deed would have to be given before the senate.
When Sallustius Crispus, who shared the secrets (he had sent the written orders to the tribune), learned of this, fearing that he would be put forward as the culprit, when it was equally dangerous to say something false or the truth, he warned Livia not to let the secrets of the palace, the counsels of friends and the services of soldiers become public, and that Tiberius should not weaken the power of the principate by referring everything to the senate: it was the condition of ruling that the account only balances if it is rendered to one man.
