So Nero avoided meeting her in private, and whenever she went off to her gardens or to her estate at Tusculum or Antium, he praised her for taking some leisure.
Finally, judging that wherever she was kept she was too great a burden, he resolved to kill her, deliberating only whether by poison, by the sword, or by some other violent means.
Poison was the first choice. But if it were given at the emperor's table, it could not be put down to chance, since Britannicus had already died in that way; to tamper with her servants seemed difficult, since the woman, from her experience of crimes, was on her guard against plots; and she herself had fortified her body by taking antidotes in advance.
As for the sword and bloodshed, no one could find a way to keep it hidden; and he feared that whoever was chosen for so great a crime might defy his orders.
The freedman Anicetus offered his ingenuity: he was prefect of the fleet at Misenum, had been Nero's tutor in boyhood, and hated Agrippina as much as she hated him.
So he explained that a ship could be built, part of which would come apart by design out at sea and pitch her overboard unawares: nothing was so full of accidents as the sea; and if she were cut off by shipwreck, who would be so unfair as to blame on a crime what the winds and waves had done wrong?
The emperor would add a temple and altars to the dead woman and everything else for making a show of filial devotion.
The ingenious plan found favour, helped also by the timing, since he was attending the festival days of the Quinquatrus at Baiae.
He lured his mother there, repeatedly saying that a parent's fits of temper must be borne and her feelings soothed, so as to create a rumour of reconciliation and to make Agrippina accept it, with women's easy credulity for joyful news.
Then, going to meet her on the shore as she arrived (for she was coming from Antium), he welcomed her with his hand and an embrace and took her to Bauli.
That is the name of a villa washed by the sea where it curves between the promontory of Misenum and the lake of Baiae.
Among the other ships stood one more finely fitted out, as if this too were meant to honour his mother: for she had been accustomed to travel in a trireme rowed by marines.
And on that occasion she had been invited to a banquet, so that night could be used to conceal the crime.
It is well enough established that there was a traitor, and that Agrippina, having heard of the plot and unsure whether to believe it, was carried to Baiae in a sedan chair.
There his flattering welcome relieved her fear: she was received warmly and given the place of honour above him.
With much conversation, now with youthful familiarity and now with a serious air, as if he were sharing weighty matters with her, Nero drew the party out at length, then escorted her as she left, clinging closely to her eyes and breast, whether to complete the pretence, or because the last sight of a mother about to die held back his heart, savage as it was.
