Meanwhile, as news of Agrippina's danger spread, as though it had happened by accident, people ran down to the shore as each one heard it.
Some climbed onto the breakwaters, others into the nearest boats; others waded into the sea as far as their bodies allowed; some stretched out their hands; the whole shore was filled with laments, prayers and the clamour of people asking all sorts of questions or giving uncertain answers; a huge crowd streamed up with torches, and when it became known that she was safe, they prepared to offer their congratulations, until they were scattered by the sight of an armed and threatening column.
Anicetus surrounded the villa with a cordon of guards, broke down the door and dragged off the slaves who got in his way, until he came to the door of the bedroom; a few were standing by it, the rest having fled in terror of the men breaking in.
In the bedroom there was a dim light and a single maid, while Agrippina grew more and more anxious that no one had come from her son, not even Agerinus: good news would look different; as it was, there was loneliness, sudden noises, and the signs of the final disaster.
Then, as the maid was leaving, she said 'You too are deserting me', and looking round she saw Anicetus, accompanied by the trierarch Herculeius and the naval centurion Obaritus: and she said that if he had come to visit her, he could report that she had recovered; but if he was there to commit a crime, she believed nothing of the kind about her son: he had not ordered matricide.
The assassins surrounded the bed, and the trierarch was first to strike her on the head with a club.
As the centurion was drawing his sword to kill her, she thrust out her womb and cried 'Strike the belly!', and she was finished off with many wounds.
These things are reported by common agreement. Whether Nero looked at his mother's dead body and praised its beauty, some have recorded, others deny.
She was cremated that same night on a dining couch with a mean funeral; and as long as Nero was in power, no earth was heaped over her or enclosed.
Later, through the care of her servants, she received a modest mound, near the road to Misenum and the villa of Caesar the dictator, which from its great height looks out over the bays below.
When the pyre was lit, her freedman, surnamed Mnester, ran himself through with a sword; it is uncertain whether out of love for his patroness or fear of being killed.
Agrippina had believed many years before that this would be her end, and had scorned it.
For when she consulted them about Nero, the Chaldaeans replied that he would rule and would kill his mother; and she said, 'Let him kill me, so long as he rules.'
