❧ To knowledge of the truth I have perhaps come; to blessedness certainly not.
What shall I do?
Be active in the world, people answer.
Should I then impart my sorrow to the world, furnish one more contribution to proving how sorrowful and wretched everything is, perhaps discover a new spot in human life that had hitherto gone unnoticed?
I could then reap the rare reward of becoming famous, like the man who discovered the spots on Jupiter.
I prefer, however, to keep silent.
❧ How like itself human nature is?
With what innate genius can a little child not often show us a living picture of the larger relations.
I was truly amused today by little Ludvig.
He sat in his little chair; with visible contentment he gazed around him.
Then the nursemaid Maren went through the room.
Maren! he called; yes, little Ludvig, she answered with her usual kindness, and came over to him.
He laid his big head a little to one side, fixed his enormous eyes on her with a certain roguishness, and then said quite phlegmatically: it was not that Maren, it was another Maren.
What do we older ones do?
We call out to the whole world, and when it then comes kindly to meet us, then we say: it was not that Maren.
❧ My life is like an eternal night; when I one day die, then I can say with Achilles:
Thou art accomplished, night-watch of my existence.
❧ My life is utterly meaningless.
When I consider its various epochs, it goes with my life as with the word Schnur in the dictionary, which in the first place means a string, in the second a daughter-in-law.
All that was lacking was that the word Schnur should in the third place mean a camel, in the fourth a duster.
❧ I am likewise like the Lüneburg pig.
My thinking is a passion.
I can root up truffles splendidly for others, I myself have no joy of them.
I take the problems on my nose; but I can do no more with them than throw them back over my head.
❧ In vain I struggle against it.
My foot slips.
My life becomes, after all, a poet-existence.
Can anything more unhappy be thought?
I am singled out; fate laughs at me when it suddenly shows me how everything I do against it becomes a moment in such an existence.
I can depict hope so vividly that every hoping individuality will acknowledge my depiction; and yet it is a forgery; for while I depict it I am thinking of recollection.
❧ There is, after all, one more proof of God's existence that has hitherto been overlooked.
It is given by a servant in Aristophanes: The Knights, v. 32 ff.:
Demosthenes: What statue? You really believe in gods, then? Nicias: I do. Demosthenes: Using what proof? Nicias: Because I am hated by the gods. Is that not reasonable? Demosthenes: You are winning me over.
❧ How dreadful boredom is – dreadfully boring; I know no stronger expression, none truer; for only like is known by like.
Would there were a higher expression, a stronger one, then there would at least be one more movement.
I lie stretched out, inactive; the only thing I see is emptiness, the only thing I live on is emptiness, the only thing I move in is emptiness.
Not even pain do I suffer.
The vulture, after all, pecked constantly at Prometheus's liver; on Loki, after all, poison dripped down constantly; that was at least an interruption, even if monotonous.
Pain itself has lost its refreshment for me.
If one offered me all the world's glories or all the world's torments, they move me equally, I would not turn over onto the other side either to reach or to flee.
I die death.
And what could divert me?
Yes, if I got to see a faithfulness that withstood every trial, an enthusiasm that bore everything, a faith that moved mountains; if I perceived a thought that joined the finite and the infinite.
But my soul's poisonous doubt consumes everything.
My soul is like the Dead Sea, over which no bird can fly; when it has come halfway, it sinks exhausted down into death and destruction.
