❧ When I get up in the morning, I go straight back to bed.
I feel best in the evening, at the moment I put out the light and pull the eiderdown over my head.
Once more I raise myself up, look round the room with an indescribable satisfaction, and then good night, down under the eiderdown.
❧ What am I good for?
For nothing at all, or for anything whatever.
It is a rare accomplishment; I wonder whether it will be appreciated in life?
God knows whether those girls find a place who seek a situation as maid-of-all-work or, failing that, as anything whatever.
❧ Enigmatic one ought to be, not only to others, but also to oneself.
I study myself; when I am tired of that, I smoke a cigar to pass the time and think: God knows what our Lord really meant by me, or what he means to make of me.
❧ No woman in childbed can have stranger and more impatient wishes than I.
These wishes concern sometimes the most trivial things, sometimes the most exalted, but all of them have in equal degree the soul's momentary passion.
I wish at this moment for a plate of buckwheat porridge.
I remember from my school days, we always got buckwheat porridge on Wednesdays.
I remember how smooth and white the porridge was served, how the butter smiled up at me, how warm the porridge was to look at, how hungry I was, how impatient to be allowed to begin.
Such a plate of buckwheat porridge! I would give more than my birthright for it.
❧ The sorcerer Virgilius had himself chopped in pieces and put in a pot to be boiled for 8 days, and by this process to be rejuvenated.
He got another man to watch that no outsider peeped into the pot.
The watcher, however, could not resist the temptation; it was too early; Virgilius vanished like a little child with a cry.
I too have probably peeped too early into the pot, into the pot of life and of historical development, and will probably never get further than being a child.
❧ “Never should one lose heart; when misfortunes pile up most terribly around one, then one sees in the clouds a helping hand,” so spoke His Reverence Jesper Morten at the last evensong.
Now I am used to being out a great deal under the open sky, but have never noticed any such thing.
A few days ago, on a walking tour, I become aware of such a phenomenon.
It was not, to be sure, properly a hand, but something like an arm that stretched out of the cloud.
I sank into contemplation: it occurred to me, if only Jesper Morten were present now, that he could decide whether it was the phenomenon he was alluding to.
As I stand in the midst of these thoughts I am addressed by a wayfarer who, pointing up at the clouds, says: “Do you see that waterspout? It is rather rare that one sees one in these parts; it sometimes carries whole houses away with it.”
Good God preserve us, thought I, is that a waterspout? and took to my heels as best I could.
What, I wonder, would the Reverend Pastor Jesper Morten have done in my place?
❧ Let others complain that the age is wicked; I complain that it is wretched; for it is without passion.
People's thoughts are thin and fragile as lace, they themselves as pitiable as lace-girls.
The thoughts of their hearts are too wretched to be sinful.
For a worm it might perhaps be counted a sin to harbour such thoughts, not for a human being, who is created in God's image.
Their desires are staid and sluggish, their passions sleepy; they do their duties, these shopkeeper souls; but allow themselves nonetheless, like the Jews, to clip the coin a little bit; they think that however properly our Lord keeps his books, one can surely get away with cheating him a little.
Fie on them!
That is why my soul always turns back to the Old Testament and to Shakespeare.
There one feels, after all, that it is human beings who are speaking; there one hates, there one loves, murders one's enemy, curses his offspring through all generations, there one sins.
