❧ Wretched fate! in vain you paint up, like an old whore, your furrowed face, in vain you make a din with the fool's bells; you bore me; it is still the same, the same through the same.
No variety, always warmed-over.
Come sleep and death, you promise nothing, you keep everything.
❧ Those two familiar violin strokes!
Those two familiar violin strokes here in this moment, in the middle of the street.
Have I lost my mind, is it my ear, which from love of Mozart's music has ceased to hear, is it a reward from the gods to grant me, unhappy one, who sit like a beggar at the temple door, an ear that itself performs what it itself hears.
Only these two violin strokes; for now I hear nothing more.
As in that immortal overture they break forth from the deep chorale tones, so here they wind themselves out of the noise and din of the street, with all the surprise of a revelation.
– It must be somewhere near here; for now I hear the light dance tunes.
– So it is you, unhappy pair of artists, to whom I owe this joy.
– The one of them was perhaps some 17 years old, dressed in a green coat of kalmuck, with large bone buttons.
The coat was much too big for him.
He held the violin close up under his chin; his cap was pressed down over his eyes; his hand was hidden in a glove without fingers, the fingers red and blue with cold.
The other was older, had a chenille on.
Both of them were blind.
A little girl, who presumably led them, stood in front, tucking her hands in under her neckerchief.
Gradually we gathered, a few admirers of these tones, a postman with his bundle of letters, a little boy, a servant girl, a couple of porters.
The gentry's carriages rolled noisily past, the work wagons drowned out these tones, which surfaced in glimpses from among them.
Unhappy pair of artists, do you know that these tones hold within them all the world's glories.
– Was it not like a rendezvous. –
❧ It happened in a theatre that fire broke out in the wings.
The clown came out to inform the public of it.
They thought it was a jest and applauded; he repeated it; they cheered even more.
So I think the world will perish amid the general cheering of wits, who think that it is a joke.
❧ What, in general, is the meaning of this life?
If one divides people into two great classes, one can say that the one works in order to live, the other has no such need.
But to work in order to live cannot of course be the meaning of life, since it is surely a contradiction that constantly producing the conditions should be the answer to the question of its meaning, which by means of these is to be conditioned.
The life of the rest in general has no meaning either, except that of consuming the conditions.
If one would say that the meaning of life is to die, this again seems a contradiction.
❧ The real pleasure lies not in what one enjoys, but in the idea.
If I had in my service a submissive spirit who, when I asked for a glass of water, would bring me all the world's costliest wines deliciously blended in a goblet, then I would give him his dismissal, until he learned that the pleasure lies not in what I enjoy, but in getting my own way.
