❧ Why was I not born in Nyboder, why did I not die as a little child?
Then my father would have laid me in a little coffin, taken me himself under his arm, carried me one Sunday morning out to the grave, himself thrown earth on it, half aloud said a few words intelligible only to himself.
Only the happy ancient world could have hit on the idea of letting the little children weep in Elysium because they had died so early.
❧ Never have I been glad; and yet it has always looked as though joy were in my company, as though the light genii of joy danced around me, invisible to others, but not to me, whose eye shone with delight; when I then walk past people as happy and glad as a god, and they envy me my happiness, then I laugh; for I despise people, and I take my revenge.
Never have I wished to do any person wrong, but always given it the appearance that every person who came near me was offended and wronged.
When I then hear others praised for their faithfulness, their integrity, then I laugh; for I despise people, and I take my revenge.
Never has my heart been hardened against any person, but always, precisely when I was most moved, I have given it the appearance that my heart was closed and a stranger to every feeling.
When I then hear others extolled for their good heart, see them loved for their deep, rich feeling, then I laugh; for I despise people and take my revenge.
When I see myself cursed, abhorred, hated for my coldness and heartlessness, then I laugh; then my wrath is sated.
For if the good people could bring me really to be in the wrong, really to do wrong – yes, then I would have lost.
❧ It is my misfortune: beside me there always walks a destroying angel, and it is not the door of the elect that I sprinkle with blood as a sign that he is to pass it by; no, it is precisely their door he steps in at; for only the love of recollection is happy.
❧ Wine no longer gladdens my heart; a little of it makes me wistful; much – melancholy.
My soul is dull and strengthless; in vain I dig the spur of desire into its side; it can do no more, it no longer rises in its royal leap.
I have lost all my illusion.
In vain I seek to give myself up to the infinity of joy; it cannot lift me, or rather I cannot lift myself.
Once, when it merely beckoned, then I mounted, light and sound and bold.
When I rode slowly through the forest, then it was as though I flew; when now the horse foams, near to collapsing, then it seems to me that I do not move from the spot.
Alone I am, that I have always been; forsaken, not by people, that would not pain me, but by the happy genii of joy, who in a numerous throng surrounded me, who everywhere met acquaintances, everywhere showed me an opportunity.
As a drunken man gathers youth's wanton swarm about him, so they flocked about me, the elves of joy, and my smile was meant for them.
My soul has lost possibility.
Should I wish for something, then I would wish not for wealth or power, but for the passion of possibility, the eye which everywhere, eternally young, eternally burning, sees possibility.
Enjoyment disappoints, possibility does not.
And what wine is so foaming, what so fragrant, what so intoxicating!
