❧ Where the sun's rays do not reach, there the tones still reach.
My room is dark and gloomy; a high wall almost keeps the light of day away.
It must be in the neighbouring yard, presumably a wandering musician.
What kind of instrument is it?
A reed pipe? .... what do I hear – the minuet from Don Juan.
Carry me off again, then, in rich and strong tones, to the circle of the girls, to the delight of the dance.
– The apothecary pounds in his mortar, the maid scours her pot, the stable-boy curries his horse and knocks the currycomb out on the cobblestones; for me alone are these tones meant, me alone they beckon.
O! thank you, whoever you are, thank you! my soul is so rich, so healthy, so drunk with joy.
❧ Salmon is in and of itself a very delicate dish; but when one gets too much of it, it is harmful to the health, since it is a heavy food.
When, therefore, a great quantity of salmon was once caught in Hamburg, the police ordered that every master of a household might give his servants salmon only once a week.
It were to be wished that a similar police notice might be issued concerning sentimentality.
❧ My sorrow is my knight's castle, which like an eagle's nest lies high up on the peak of the mountains among the clouds; no one can storm it.
From it I fly down into reality and seize my prey; but I do not stay down there, my prey I bring home, and this prey is a picture I weave into the tapestries of my castle.
Then I live like one departed.
All that has been lived through I dip down in the baptism of oblivion unto the eternity of recollection.
All that is finite and accidental is forgotten and blotted out.
Then I sit like an old grey-haired man, thoughtful, and explain the pictures in a low voice, almost whispering, and by my side sits a child and listens, although it remembers everything before I tell it.
❧ The sun shines so beautifully and brightly into my room, the window stands open in the next one; in the street all is still, it is Sunday afternoon: I hear distinctly a lark, which outside a window in one of the neighbouring yards beats out its trills, outside the window where the pretty girl lives; far off, from a distant street, I hear a man crying shrimps; the air is so warm, and yet the whole town is as if dead.
– Then I remember my youth and my first love – then I longed, now I long only for my first longing.
What is youth?
A dream.
What is love?
The content of the dream.
❧ Something wonderful has happened to me.
I was carried up into the seventh heaven.
There sat all the gods assembled.
By special grace the favour was granted me of making a wish.
“Will you,” said Mercury, “will you have youth, or beauty, or power, or a long life, or the most beautiful girl, or some other splendour of the many we have in the pedlar's chest, then choose, but only one thing.”
I was for a moment at a loss; then I turned to the gods thus: Most esteemed contemporaries, I choose one thing: that I may always have the laughter on my side.
There was not a god who answered a word; instead they all began to laugh.
From this I concluded that my prayer was granted, and found that the gods knew how to express themselves with taste; for it would after all have been unfitting to answer gravely: it is granted you.
