❧ It takes, after all, great naivety to believe that it will help to shout and scream in the world, as if one's fate were thereby changed.
One should take it as it is offered, and refrain from all fuss.
When in my youth I went to a restaurant, I too would say to the waiter: a good cut, a very good cut, from the back, not too fat.
The waiter perhaps scarcely heard my call, still less that he would heed it, still less that my voice could penetrate into the kitchen, move the carver, and even if all this happened, perhaps there was not a good cut on the whole roast.
Now I never shout any more.
❧ The social striving and the beautiful sympathy accompanying it are spreading more and more.
In Leipzig a committee has formed which, out of sympathy with the sad end of old horses, has resolved to eat them.
❧ I have only one friend, that is Echo; and why is it my friend? because I love my sorrow, and it does not take it from me.
I have only one confidant, that is the silence of the night; and why is it my confidant? because it keeps silent.
❧ As, according to the legend, it went with Parmeniscus, who in the Trophonian cave lost the ability to laugh, but got it back on Delos at the sight of a shapeless block that was displayed as the image of the goddess Leto, so has it gone with me.
When I was very young, I forgot in the Trophonian cave how to laugh; when I grew older, when I opened my eyes and looked at actuality, then I began to laugh and have not stopped since that time.
I saw that it was the meaning of life to get a livelihood, its goal to become a Councillor of Justice, that it was the rich delight of love to get a well-to-do girl, that it was the bliss of friendship to help one another out of money troubles; that it was wisdom, what most people took for it; that it was enthusiasm to make a speech; that it was courage to risk being fined 10 rix-dollars; that it was cordiality to say “may it do you good” after a dinner; that it was the fear of God to go to communion once a year.
That I saw, and I laughed.
❧ What is it that binds me?
Of what was the chain made with which the Fenris wolf was bound?
It was fashioned from the noise a cat's feet make when it walks on the ground, from women's beards, from the roots of the rocks, from the bear's grass, from the breath of fish and the spittle of birds.
So I too am bound in a chain that is made of dark imaginings, of anxious dreams, of restless thoughts, of fearful forebodings, of unexplained anxieties.
This chain is “very supple, soft as silk, yields to the strongest strain, and cannot be torn apart.”
❧ It is strange enough: it is always the same thing that occupies one through all the ages of life, and one always gets just as far, or rather one goes backwards.
When I was 15 years old, I wrote at grammar school with much unction about the proofs of God's existence and the immortality of the soul, about the concept of faith, about the meaning of miracle.
For my university entrance I wrote an essay on the immortality of the soul, for which I was awarded “above all others”; later I won the prize for an essay on this subject.
Who would believe that I, after so solid and very promising a beginning, should in my 25th year have come so far that I cannot produce a single proof of the immortality of the soul.
I especially remember from my schooldays that an essay of mine on the immortality of the soul was extraordinarily praised and read aloud by the teacher, as much on account of the excellence of its content as of its language.
Alas, alas, alas! this essay I threw away long ago.
What a misfortune!
In it perhaps my doubting soul would have been held captive, as much by the language as by the content.
So it is my advice to parents, guardians and teachers to urge the children entrusted to them to keep the Danish essays that are written in the 15th year.
To give this advice is the only thing I can do for the good of the human race.
