❧ So it is not I who am master of my life, I am one thread more, to be spun into the calico of life.
Very well, if I cannot spin, I can at least cut the thread.
❧ Everything is to be won in stillness and made divine in silence.
It is not only of Psyche's coming child that it holds, that its future depends on her silence.
With a child that is divine if you keep silent – but human if you reveal the secret.
❧ I seem destined to have to suffer through every possible mood, to have to gain experience in every direction.
Every moment I lie like a child who is to learn to swim, far out in the middle of the sea.
I scream (this I have learned from the Greeks, from whom one can learn the purely human); for true, I have a harness round my waist, but the pole that is to hold me up I do not see.
It is a dreadful way to gain experience.
❧ It is strange enough: through the two most dreadful opposites one gets an idea of eternity.
If I think of that unhappy bookkeeper who, in despair at having ruined a trading house by saying in an account that 7 and 6 is 14, went out of his mind; if I think of him day in and day out, untouched by everything else, repeating to himself, 7 and 6 is 14, then I have a picture of eternity.
– If I think of a voluptuous female beauty in a harem, resting on a sofa in all her grace, without a care for anything in the world, then again I have a picture of eternity.
❧ What the philosophers say about actuality is often just as deceptive as when at a second-hand dealer's one reads on a sign: mangling done here.
If one came with one's clothes to have them mangled, one would be fooled; for the sign is only for sale.
❧ For me nothing is more dangerous than to recollect.
Once I have recollected a life-relation, the relation itself has ceased.
People say that separation helps to refresh love.
That is quite true, but it refreshes it in a purely poetic way.
To live in recollection is the most perfect life that can be thought, recollection satisfies more richly than all actuality, and it has a security that no actuality possesses.
A recollected life-relation has already passed into eternity and has no temporal interest any more.
❧ If anyone should keep a diary, it should be me, to give my memory a little help.
After some time has passed it often happens to me that I have wholly forgotten what reasons moved me to this or that, and that not only concerning trifles, but the most decisive steps.
If the reason then occurs to me, it can sometimes be so peculiar that I myself will not believe that it was the reason.
This doubt would then be removed if I had something written to hold on to.
A reason is in general a peculiar thing: if I look at it with all my passion, it grows into an enormous necessity that can set heaven and earth in motion; if I am without passion, then I look down on it with scorn.
– For some time now I have been speculating over what reason it really was that moved me to resign my post as assistant master.
When I think about it now, it seems to me that such an appointment was just the thing for me.
Today a light has dawned on me: the reason was precisely this, that I had to consider myself wholly fitted for this post.
Had I then remained in my office, I would have had everything to lose, nothing to gain.
For that reason I thought it right to resign my post and seek an engagement with a travelling theatre company, on the ground that I had no talent, and therefore everything to gain.
