❧ Either – Or
An Ecstatic Lecture
Marry, and you will regret it; do not marry, and you will also regret it; marry or do not marry, you will regret both; whether you marry or you do not marry, you regret both.
Laugh at the world's follies, and you will regret it; weep over them, and you will also regret it; laugh at the world's follies or weep over them, you will regret both; whether you laugh at the world's follies or you weep over them, you regret both.
Believe a girl, and you will regret it; do not believe her, and you will also regret it; believe a girl or do not believe her, you will regret both; whether you believe a girl or you do not believe her, you will regret both.
Hang yourself, and you will regret it; do not hang yourself, and you will also regret it; hang yourself or do not hang yourself, you will regret both; whether you hang yourself or you do not hang yourself, you will regret both.
This, gentlemen, is the sum and substance of all the wisdom of life.
It is not merely in single moments that I, as Spinoza says, view everything in an eternal mode (æterno modo), but I am constantly in an eternal mode (æterno modo).
Many believe that they are this too, when, after having done the one thing or the other, they unite or mediate these opposites.
But this is a misunderstanding; for true eternity lies not behind either – or, but before it.
Their eternity will therefore also be a painful succession in time, since they will have the double regret to feed on.
My wisdom is thus easy to grasp; for I have only one principle, which I do not even proceed from.
One must distinguish between the subsequent dialectic in either – or and the eternal one hinted at here.
When I thus say here that I do not proceed from my principle, this does not have its opposite in a proceeding-from, but is merely the negative expression for my principle, that whereby it grasps itself in opposition to a proceeding-from or a not-proceeding-from.
I do not proceed from my principle; for if I proceeded from it, I would regret it; if I did not proceed from it, I would also regret it.
Should it therefore seem to one or another of my most esteemed listeners that there was after all something in what I said, he merely proves by that that his head is not fit for philosophy; should it seem to him that there was movement in what was said, this proves the same.
For those listeners, on the other hand, who are able to follow me, although I make no movement, I will now unfold the eternal truth whereby this philosophy remains in itself and admits no higher one.
For if I proceeded from my principle, then I would not be able to stop again; for if I did not stop, I would regret it; if I stopped, I would also regret it, and so on. Now, on the other hand, since I never proceed, I can always cease; for my eternal proceeding is my eternal ceasing.
Experience has shown that it is by no means so difficult for philosophy to begin.
Far from it; it begins, after all, with nothing, and can therefore always begin.
What, on the other hand, comes hard to philosophy and the philosophers is to cease.
This difficulty too I have avoided; for if anyone should believe that I, in now stopping, really stop, he shows that he has no speculative grasp.
For I am not stopping now; but I stopped at the time I began.
My philosophy therefore has the excellent property that it is short, and that it is irrefutable; for if anyone contradicts me, I should surely be right to declare him mad.
The philosopher, then, is constantly in an eternal mode (æterno modo), and does not, like the late Sintenis, have merely single hours that are lived for eternity.
