❧ How strangely wistful I was made to feel on seeing a poor person slink through the streets in a rather worn-out light-green coat shading into yellow.
I felt sorry for him; but what moved me most was, after all, that the colour of that same coat so vividly reminded me of my childhood's first productions in the noble art of painting.
This colour was precisely one of my favourite colours.
Is it not sad, though: these colour-mixtures, which I still think of with so much joy, one finds them nowhere in life; the whole world finds them garish, jarring, fit only for Nuremberg prints.
If one comes upon them just once in a while, the meeting must always be as unfortunate as this one.
It must always be a madman or an outcast, in short always someone who feels himself a stranger in life, and whom the world will not acknowledge.
And I, who always painted my heroes with this eternally unforgettable yellow-green tinge on their coats!
Is it not so with all the colour-mixtures of childhood?
The glow that life had then becomes by degrees too strong, too garish for our dull eye!
❧ Alas!
The door of happiness does not open inward, so that one can push it open by storming at it; but it opens outward, and so there is nothing one can do.
❧ Courage I have to doubt, I believe, everything; I have courage to fight, I believe, with everything; but I have not courage to acknowledge anything; not courage to possess, to own anything.
Most people complain that the world is so prosaic, that things do not go in life as in the novel, where the opportunity is always so favourable; I complain that it is not in life as in the novel, where one has hard-hearted fathers, and goblins and trolls to fight, enchanted princesses to set free.
What are all such enemies taken together against the pale, bloodless, tenacious, nocturnal shapes with which I fight and to which I myself give life and being.
❧ How barren is my soul and my thought, and yet incessantly tormented by empty, voluptuous and agonising birth-pangs!
Shall the tongue-tie of the spirit, then, never be loosed in me, shall I always babble?
What I need is a voice piercing as a Lynceus-glance, terrifying as the sigh of the giants, enduring as a sound of nature, mocking as a rime-frosted gust of wind, malicious as Echo's heartless jeering, of a range from the deepest bass to the most melting chest-notes, modulated from a holy-soft whisper to the energy of rage.
That is what I need in order to get air, in order to get said what lies on my mind, in order to get the bowels both of wrath and of sympathy shaken.
– But my voice is only hoarse like a gull's cry, or dying away like the blessing on the lips of the mute.
❧ What is to come?
What will the future bring?
I do not know, I have no inkling of anything.
When a spider plunges from a fixed point down into its consequences, it sees always an empty space before it, in which it can find no foothold, however much it flails.
So it goes with me; before me always an empty space; what drives me forward is a consequence that lies behind me.
This life is backwards and dreadful, not to be endured.
