❧ What is a poet?
An unhappy person who hides deep torments in his heart, but whose lips are so formed that as the sigh and the cry stream out over them, they sound like a beautiful music.
It goes with him as with the unfortunates who in Phalaris's ox were slowly tortured over a gentle fire; their cries could not reach the tyrant's ear to terrify him, to him they sounded like a sweet music.
And people flock around the poet and say to him: sing again soon; that is to say, may new sufferings torment your soul, and may your lips go on being formed as before; for the cry would only alarm us, but the music, that is delightful.
And the reviewers step up, they say: that is right, so it must be according to the rules of aesthetics.
Now of course, a reviewer also resembles a poet to a hair, only he has not the torments in his heart, nor the music on his lips.
See, therefore I would rather be a swineherd at Amagerbro and be understood by the swine, than be a poet and be misunderstood by people.
❧ The first question in the first, the most compendious instruction in which a child is taught, is, as is well known, this: what shall the child have?
The answer is: Da-da.
And with such considerations life begins, and yet people deny original sin.
And whom, after all, has the child to thank for its first thrashing, whom but its parents?
❧ I prefer talking with children; for of them one may still hope that they can become rational beings; but those who have become so!
Lord Jiminy!
❧ People are unreasonable, after all.
They never use the freedoms they have, but demand those they do not have; they have freedom of thought, they demand freedom of speech.
❧ I can't be bothered at all.
I can't be bothered to ride, it is too violent a motion; I can't be bothered to walk, it is too strenuous; I can't be bothered to lie down; for either I should stay lying there, and I can't be bothered with that, or I should get up again, and I can't be bothered with that either.
Summa summarum, I can't be bothered at all.
❧ There are, as is well known, insects that die in the moment of fertilisation; so it is with all joy: life's highest and most luxuriant moment of pleasure is accompanied by death.
❧ Proven Advice for Authors
One writes down one's own reflections carelessly, one has them printed; in the various proofs one will then gradually get a host of good ideas.
Take courage therefore, you who have not yet dared to have anything printed; misprints too are not to be despised, and to become witty with the help of misprints must be considered a legitimate way of becoming so.
❧ It is altogether the imperfection of everything human that only through its opposite does one possess what is desired.
I will not speak of the variety of formations that can give the psychologist enough to do (the melancholy man has the most comic sense, the most voluptuous often the most idyllic; the dissolute often the most moral; the doubter often the most religious), but merely recall that only through sin is blessedness glimpsed.
❧ Besides my other numerous circle of acquaintance, I have yet one intimate confidant – my melancholy; in the midst of my joy, in the midst of my work, he beckons to me, calls me aside, even though bodily I remain present.
My melancholy is the most faithful mistress I have known; what wonder, then, that I love in return.
