❧ My time I divide thus.
Half the time I sleep, the other half I dream; when I sleep, I never dream, that would be a pity; for to sleep, that is the highest genius.
❧ To be a perfect human being is, after all, the highest.
Now I have got corns, that is always some help.
❧ My life's result will be nothing at all, a mood, a single colour.
My result will bear a likeness to that artist's painting, who was to paint the crossing of the Jews over the Red Sea, and to that end painted the whole wall red, explaining that the Jews had gone over, the Egyptians had drowned.
❧ Human dignity is, after all, still acknowledged in nature; for when one wants to keep the birds away from the trees, one sets up something that is to resemble a human being, and even the distant likeness to a human being that a scarecrow has is enough to instil respect.
❧ If love is to have any meaning, it must in its hour of birth be shone upon by the moon, just as Apis, to be the true Apis, had to be moon-shone.
The cow that bore Apis had, in the moment of conception, to be shone upon by the moon.
❧ The best proof offered of the wretchedness of existence is the one drawn from the contemplation of its glory.
❧ Most people hurry so hard after pleasure that they hurry right past it.
It goes with them as it went with that dwarf who guarded an abducted princess in his castle.
One day he took an afternoon nap.
When he woke up an hour later, she was gone.
Quickly he pulls on his seven-league boots; with one stride he is far past her.
❧ My soul is so heavy that no thought can bear it any more, no wingbeat lift it up any more into the ether.
If it is moved, it only skims along the ground, like the low flight of birds when the wind rises before a thunderstorm.
Over my inner being broods an oppression, an anxiety, that forebodes an earthquake.
❧ How empty and meaningless life is.
– One buries a man; one follows him to the grave, one throws three spadefuls of earth on him; one drives out in a carriage, one drives home in a carriage; one comforts oneself that there lies a long life before one.
How long, then, is 7 × 10 years?
Why not finish it off all at once, why not stay out there, and go down with him into the grave, and draw lots for who shall have the misfortune to be the last one living, who throws the last 3 spadefuls of earth on the last dead one?
❧ Girls do not please me.
Their beauty passes like a dream and like the day yesterday, when it is gone.
Their faithfulness.
– Yes, their faithfulness!
Either they are faithless, and this no longer concerns me, or they are faithful.
If I found such a one, then she would please me in consideration of her being a rarity, in consideration of the length of time she would not please me; for either she stayed ever faithful, and then I would of course become a victim of my experimenting zeal, since I would have to put up with her, or there came a moment when she stopped, and then I would of course have the old story.
