❧ It is, after all, the loveliest time, the first period of being in love, when from every meeting, every glance, one brings something new home to rejoice over.
❧ My view of life is utterly meaningless.
I suppose that an evil spirit has set a pair of spectacles on my nose, one lens of which magnifies on an enormous scale, the other lens of which diminishes on the same scale.
❧ The doubter is a whipped one; like a top he keeps himself up on the point for a shorter or longer time in proportion to the lashes; stand he cannot, any more than the top.
❧ Of all ridiculous things it seems to me the most ridiculous of all to be busy in the world, to be a man who is quick to his food and quick to his work.
When therefore I see a fly, at the decisive moment, settle on the nose of such a man of business, or he is splashed by a carriage that drives past him in still greater haste, or Knippelsbro goes up, or a roof-tile falls down and kills him, then I laugh from the bottom of my heart.
And who could possibly keep from laughing?
What do they accomplish, then, these busy hurriers?
Does it not go with them as it went with that woman who, flustered because there was a fire in the house, rescued the fire-tongs?
What more do they rescue from life's great conflagration?
❧ I lack, altogether, the patience to live.
I cannot see the grass grow, but when I cannot, then I can't be bothered to look at it at all.
My views are the fleeting observations of a “wandering scholar” who rushes through life in the greatest haste.
They say our Lord fills the belly before the eyes; I cannot notice that: my eyes are sated and weary of everything, and yet I hunger.
❧ Let people ask me what they will, only let them not ask me for reasons.
A young girl is forgiven for not being able to give reasons; she lives in feeling, it is said.
Otherwise with me.
As a rule I have so many, and mostly mutually contradictory, reasons that for that reason it is impossible for me to give reasons.
With cause and effect too it seems to me that things do not hang together properly.
Sometimes from enormous and mighty causes there issues a very puny and insignificant little effect, sometimes none at all; sometimes a nimble little cause begets a colossal effect.
❧ And now life's innocent joys.
One must grant them that, they have only one fault: that they are so innocent.
Moreover they are to be enjoyed in moderation.
When my doctor prescribes me a diet, that is reasonable; I abstain for a certain fixed time from certain fixed foods; but to be dietetic in keeping a diet – that really is asking too much.
❧ Life has become to me a bitter drink, and yet it must be taken like drops, slowly, counting.
❧ No one returns from the dead, no one has entered the world without weeping; no one asks one when one wants to come in, no one when one wants to go out.
❧ Time passes, life is a stream, people say, etc. I cannot notice it; time stands still and I with it.
All the plans I cast out fly straight back at me; when I want to spit, I spit myself in the face.
