For them the far-famed bard was singing, and they in silence
sat listening; and he sang of the return of the Achaeans,
the woeful return which Pallas Athena laid on them out of Troy.
And from the upper chamber his wondrous song was heeded in her mind by
the daughter of Icarius, circumspect Penelope;
and she came down the high staircase of her house,
not alone — together with her there followed two handmaids as well.
And when she, shining among women, came to the suitors,
she stood beside the doorpost of the stoutly built roof,
holding her shining veil before her cheeks;
and a trusty handmaid stood on either side of her.
Then, bursting into tears, she addressed the divine bard:
Phemius, many other charms of mortals you know,
deeds of men and of gods, which bards make famous;
sit beside them and sing them one of those, and let them in silence
drink their wine; but cease from this song,
this woeful one, which always within my breast my dear heart
wears down, since grief beyond forgetting has come upon me above all.
For such a head do I long for, remembering him always,
a man whose fame is wide through Hellas and mid-Argos.
Then wise Telemachus answered her in turn:
My mother, why then do you begrudge the trusty bard
his delighting us in whatever way his mind is stirred? It is not the bards
who are to blame, but Zeus, I suppose, is to blame, who gives
to bread-eating men, just as he wills, to each one.
With this man there is no cause for anger, that he sings the evil doom of the Danaans;
for men give greater renown to that song
which comes newest to those who hear it.
So let your heart and spirit endure to listen;
for Odysseus was not the only one who lost his day of homecoming
in Troy, but many other men perished too.
But go into the house and attend to your own tasks,
the loom and the distaff, and bid your handmaids
go about their work; speech shall be men's concern,
all men's, and mine above all; for the power in this house is mine.
She, in amazement, went back into the house;
for she laid to heart the wise word of her son.
And going up to the upper chamber with her handmaid women
she then wept for Odysseus, her dear husband, until upon her
gleaming-eyed Athena cast sweet sleep on her eyelids.
But the suitors broke into uproar through the shadowy halls,
and all of them prayed to lie beside her in bed.
And among them wise Telemachus began to speak:
Suitors of my mother, possessed of overbearing insolence,
for now let us feast and take our pleasure, and let there be no
shouting, since this is a fine thing, to listen to a singer
such as this man is, like to the gods in voice.
But at dawn let us go and take our seats in the assembly,
all of us, so that I may declare my word to you outright:
get out of my halls; and busy yourselves with other feasts,
eating your own possessions, moving from house to house.
But if this seems to you the better and finer thing,
that one man's livelihood be destroyed without recompense,
then waste it; but I will cry out to the gods who are forever,
in the hope that Zeus may somehow grant that deeds of requital come to pass;
then you would perish within these halls unavenged.
So he spoke, and they all bit their lips
and marvelled at Telemachus, that he spoke so boldly.
Then Antinous answered him, the son of Eupeithes:
Telemachus, surely the gods themselves are teaching you
to be a lofty talker and to speak boldly;
may the son of Cronos never make you king in sea-girt Ithaca,
which is your inheritance by birth from your father.
Then wise Telemachus answered him in turn:
Antinous, will you indeed be indignant with me for whatever I say?
Even this I would be willing to accept, if Zeus should grant it.
Do you say this is the worst thing that can befall among men?
For it is no bad thing to be king; straightway one's house
grows rich and oneself more honoured.
But truly there are other kings of the Achaeans too,
many of them, in sea-girt Ithaca, young and old,
one of whom may hold this office, since noble Odysseus is dead;
but I will be lord of our own house
and of the slaves whom noble Odysseus won for me.
Then Eurymachus, son of Polybus, answered him in turn:
Telemachus, truly these things lie on the knees of the gods,
whoever shall be king over the Achaeans in seagirt Ithaca;
but may you yourself keep your possessions and be lord in your own house.
For never may that man come who against your will, by force,
shall wrest your possessions from you, while Ithaca is still a peopled land.
But I wish, noblest one, to ask you about the stranger,
from where that man comes, and from what land he claims to be
sprung, and where now are his kindred and his native ploughland.
Does he bring some tidings of your father's coming,
or does he arrive here seeking some business of his own?
How he sprang up and was gone in an instant, nor did he wait
to be known; and yet in his face he seemed no base man.
Then wise Telemachus answered him in turn:
Eurymachus, surely my father's homecoming is lost and gone;
so I no longer put trust in tidings, from wherever they may come,
nor do I heed any prophecy, whatever seer my mother
may summon into the hall and question.
But this stranger is a guest-friend of my father's house, from Taphos,
and he claims to be of wise Anchialus the
son, Mentes, and he is lord over the oar-loving Taphians.
So spoke Telemachus, but in his heart he knew the immortal goddess.
And they, turning to the dance and to lovely song,
took their pleasure, and waited for evening to come on.
And as they made merry, dark evening came upon them;
then at last they went, each man to his own house, to take their rest.
But Telemachus, where his chamber off the beautiful courtyard
had been built high, in a place with a clear view all round,
there he went to his bed, pondering many things in his heart.
And along with him, bearing blazing torches, went she of loyal thoughts,
Eurycleia, daughter of Ops, Peisenor's son,
whom once Laertes had bought with his own possessions,
while she was still in her first youth, and he gave the worth of twenty oxen,
and he honoured her equally with his faithful wife in his halls,
but never lay with her in love, and so he shunned his wife's anger;
she it was who bore the blazing torches beside him, and him most
of all the handmaids she loved, and she had nursed him when he was little.
And she opened the doors of the close-built chamber,
and he sat down on the bed and stripped off his soft tunic;
and this he cast into the hands of the shrewd old woman.
She, folding the tunic and smoothing it out,
hung it on a peg beside the corded bedstead,
then went her way from the chamber, and pulled the door to by its handle
of silver, and shot the bolt home with the strap.
There all night long, wrapped in a fleece of wool,
he pondered in his mind the journey that Athena had shown him.
