Then wise Telemachus answered her in turn:
Stranger, since indeed you ask me these things and inquire,
this house once bade fair to be rich and blameless
indeed, while that man was still at home among his people;
but now the gods have willed otherwise, devising evils,
they who have made that man unseen beyond all
men, since not even for his death would I grieve so,
if he had been slain among his comrades in the land of the Trojans,
or in the arms of his friends, when he had wound up the war.
Then the Panachaeans would have made him a tomb,
and for his son too he would have won great glory in time to come.
But now the storm-winds have snatched him away without glory;
he is gone, unseen, unheard of, and to me pains and lamentations
he has left. Nor do I mourn and groan for him
alone, since now the gods have wrought other evil cares for me.
For all the best men who hold sway over the islands,
over Dulichium and Same and wooded Zacynthus,
and all who lord it throughout rocky Ithaca,
so many woo my mother, and wear away the house.
And she neither refuses the hateful marriage nor an end
can she bring about; and they with their eating waste away
my own house; and soon they will tear me to pieces myself as well.
Then, stirred to anger, Pallas Athena spoke to him:
Alas, truly you have great need of Odysseus, who is gone away,
that he might lay his hands upon the shameless suitors.
For if only he would come now and at the outer doors of the house
take his stand, wearing helmet and shield and two spears,
being such a man as when I first knew him
in our house, drinking and making merry,
coming up from Ephyre, from the house of Ilus son of Mermerus—
for Odysseus went there too on his swift ship
seeking a man-slaying poison, so that he might have it
to smear on his bronze-tipped arrows; but that man would not
give it to him, since he stood in awe of the gods who are forever,
but my father gave it to him; for he loved him exceedingly—
being such a man, might Odysseus come among the suitors;
then would they all be swift-doomed and bitter in their marriage.
But truly these things lie on the knees of the gods,
whether he will return and take vengeance, or whether not,
in his own halls; but you I bid to take thought
how you may thrust the suitors out of the hall.
Come now, give heed and mark my words:
tomorrow call the Achaean heroes to assembly
and declare your word to all, and let the gods be witnesses.
Bid the suitors scatter to their own homes,
and as for your mother, if her heart urges her to marry,
let her go back to the hall of her father, a man of great power;
and they will prepare the wedding and make ready the bride-gifts,
very many, as many as ought to go with a beloved daughter.
And to you yourself I will give shrewd counsel, if you will heed it:
fit out a ship with twenty rowers, the best there is,
and go to seek news of your father, so long gone away,
in case some mortal may tell you of him, or you may hear a rumour
from Zeus, which most of all carries tidings to men.
First go to Pylos and question godlike Nestor,
and from there to Sparta, to fair-haired Menelaus;
for he came home last of the bronze-clad Achaeans.
If you hear that your father is alive and returning,
then, worn down though you are, you could endure for yet a year;
but if you hear that he is dead and no longer living,
then return to your dear fatherland
and heap up a mound for him and pay him funeral rites over it,
very many, as many as are fitting, and give your mother to a husband.
But when you have finished and accomplished these things,
then take thought in your mind and in your heart
how the suitors in your halls
you may kill, whether by guile or openly; nor is there any need for you
to cling to childish ways, since you are no longer of such an age.
Or have you not heard what fame godlike Orestes won
among all men, when he slew his father's murderer,
guileful Aegisthus, who had killed his glorious father?
And you, my friend — for I see you are very handsome and tall —
be valiant, so that many a man even of those born hereafter may speak well of you.
But I will now go down to my swift ship
and my comrades, who I think are chafing greatly as they wait for me;
but let this be your own concern, and take heed of my words.
Then wise Telemachus answered her in turn:
Stranger, truly you say these things with kindly intent,
as a father to his son, and never will I forget them.
But come now, stay a while, eager though you are for your journey,
so that, having bathed and delighted your own dear heart,
you may go to your ship with a gift, rejoicing in spirit,
a precious one, very beautiful, which shall be an heirloom for you
from me, such things as dear guest-friends give to guest-friends.
Then the goddess, gleaming-eyed Athena, answered him:
Do not hold me back any longer now, eager as I am for my journey.
And whatever gift your dear heart bids you give me,
give it to me when I come back again, to carry homeward,
and choose a right beautiful one; it will bring you a worthy return.
So then, having spoken thus, gleaming-eyed Athena departed,
and like a bird she flew away up through the smoke-vent; and in his heart
she put strength and courage, and reminded him of his father
even more than before. And he, taking note in his mind,
marvelled in his heart; for he guessed that it was a god.
And straightway he went among the suitors, a godlike man.
