Then all the others, as many as had escaped sheer destruction,
were at home, having escaped both the war and the sea;
but him alone, longing for his homecoming and his wife,
the queenly nymph Calypso, shining among goddesses, kept back
in her hollow caves, yearning that he be her husband.
But when at last the year came, as the seasons rolled round,
in which the gods had spun for him to return home
to Ithaca, not even there was he free of trials,
even among his own dear people. And all the gods pitied him
except Poseidon; he raged unceasingly
against godlike Odysseus, until he should reach his own land.
But he had gone among the Ethiopians who dwell far off,
the Ethiopians who are divided in two, the remotest of men,
some where Hyperion sets, the others where he rises,
to receive a hecatomb of bulls and rams.
There he sat and took his pleasure at the feast; but the others
were gathered together in the halls of Olympian Zeus.
And among them the father of men and gods began to speak;
for he remembered in his heart blameless Aegisthus,
whom far-famed Orestes, Agamemnon's son, had slain;
remembering him, he spoke these words among the immortals:
"Ah me, how indeed mortals now blame the gods!
For from us, they say, come their evils, yet they themselves
by their own recklessness have sorrows beyond what is fated,
as even now Aegisthus, beyond what was fated, the son of Atreus's
wedded wife has married, and slew the man himself on his return,
though he knew it was sheer destruction, since we told him beforehand,
sending Hermes, the keen-sighted slayer of Argus,
neither to kill the man nor to woo his wife;
for from Orestes will come vengeance for the son of Atreus,
whenever he comes of age and longs for his own land.
So spoke Hermes, but the mind of Aegisthus
he did not persuade, though meaning well; and now he has paid for it all at once."
Then the goddess, grey-eyed Athena, answered him:
"Our father, son of Cronos, highest of rulers,
truly that man lies low in a destruction well deserved;
so too may any other perish who does such deeds;
but my heart is torn for war-minded Odysseus,
the ill-fated one, who far from his dear ones has long been suffering woes
on a sea-girt island, where the navel of the sea lies.
a wooded island, and a goddess dwells there in her halls,
the daughter of baneful-minded Atlas, who of the whole sea
knows the depths, and himself holds the pillars,
tall ones, which keep earth and heaven apart.
His daughter detains that wretched, grieving man,
and ever with soft and wheedling words
she charms him, so that he may forget Ithaca; but Odysseus,
longing to catch sight of even the smoke leaping up
from his own land, yearns to die. And not even so is your
own heart moved, Olympian. Did not Odysseus
beside the ships of the Argives win your favour, offering sacrifices
in wide Troy? Why then are you so wroth with him, Zeus?
Answering her, cloud-gathering Zeus spoke:
My child, what word has escaped the barrier of your teeth!
How then could I forget godlike Odysseus,
who is beyond mortals in mind, and beyond all others offerings to the gods
immortal has given — the gods who hold the wide heaven?
But Poseidon the earth-holder is unrelentingly, forever
wrathful over the Cyclops, whom he blinded of his eye —
godlike Polyphemus, whose might is greatest
among all the Cyclopes; the nymph Thoosa bore him,
daughter of Phorcys, lord of the unresting sea,
having lain with Poseidon in the hollow caves.
Ever since then, Poseidon the earth-shaker, though Odysseus
he does not kill, yet drives him wandering from his native land.
But come, let all of us here take careful thought for
his homecoming, how he may return; and Poseidon will let go
his anger; for surely he will not be able, in the face of all
the immortal gods, to strive alone against their will.
Then the goddess, gleaming-eyed Athena, answered him:
O our father, son of Cronos, highest of rulers,
if indeed this is now pleasing to the blessed gods,
that wise Odysseus should return to his own home,
then let us send Hermes the guide, the slayer of Argus,
to the island of Ogygia, so that with all speed
he may tell the fair-tressed nymph our unerring counsel,
the homecoming of steadfast-hearted Odysseus, that he may return;
but I shall go to Ithaca, so that his son
I may rouse the more, and put strength in his heart
to call the long-haired Achaeans to assembly
and speak out against all the suitors, who forever
slaughter his thronging sheep and his shambling crook-horned cattle.
And I will send him to Sparta and to sandy Pylos
to seek news of the homecoming of his dear father, if perhaps he may hear of it,
and so that noble fame among men may be his.
