Ardea was held by the Rutulians, a people who, for that region and that age, were exceptionally rich; and this very wealth was the cause of the war, since the Roman king, drained by the splendour of his public works, was eager both to enrich himself and to soothe the feelings of his people with plunder, for besides his arrogance in other respects they were hostile to his rule because they resented having been kept so long by the king at the work of craftsmen and at the labour of slaves.
An attempt was made to see whether Ardea could be taken at the first assault: when that met with little success, they began to press the enemy with a siege and siege-works.
In this standing camp, as tends to happen in a war that is long rather than fierce, leave to come and go was fairly free, though more for the leading men than for the soldiers; the young princes, at any rate, passed their idle hours now and then in feasting and revelling together.
As it happened, they were drinking at the quarters of Sextus Tarquinius, where Tarquinius Collatinus, son of Egerius, was also dining, when talk fell upon their wives.
Each man praised his own to the skies; then, as the rivalry grew heated, Collatinus said there was no need for words: within a few hours, he said, they could know how far his Lucretia surpassed the rest.
“Why not, if we have the vigour of youth in us, mount our horses and see for ourselves what our wives are like?
Let each man judge best by what meets his eyes when her husband arrives unexpected.”
They were warm with wine; “Come on, then!” they all cried; they spurred their horses and flew off to Rome.
Arriving there as darkness was first falling, they went on from there to Collatia, where they found Lucretia not at all like the king’s daughters-in-law, whom they had seen passing the time at a banquet and in luxury with their companions, but, though it was late at night, busy with her wool, sitting in the middle of the house among her maids as they worked by lamplight.
The prize in the contest of wives went to Lucretia.
Her husband on his arrival and the Tarquins were warmly received; the victorious husband courteously invited the young princes to stay.
There Sextus Tarquinius was seized by a wicked desire to violate Lucretia by force; both her beauty and her proven chastity inflamed him.
And for the moment they returned to camp from their youthful night-time frolic.
