Then I spoke up, for I dared to speak freely before the Cardinal: “Do not be at all surprised,” I said.
“For this punishment of thieves goes beyond what is just, and is not in the public interest.
It is too savage as a penalty for theft, and yet not enough to restrain it.
For simple theft is not so enormous a crime that it ought to be punished by death, nor is any penalty so great that it will keep from robbery those who have no other means of earning a living.
So in this matter not only you but a good part of the world seem to imitate bad schoolmasters, who would rather beat their pupils than teach them.
For heavy and horrible punishments are decreed for a thief, when it would have been far better to provide some means of livelihood, so that no one should be under so dire a necessity, first of stealing, then of dying.”
“That has been provided for well enough,” he said; “there are the crafts, there is farming; by these they could keep themselves alive, if they did not of their own accord prefer to be wicked.”
“But you will not escape so easily,” I said.
“For first let us leave aside those who often come home maimed from foreign or civil wars, as lately among you from the Cornish battle, and not so long ago from the French war, men who spend their limbs for the commonwealth or for the king, whom disability does not allow to practise their former crafts, nor age to learn a new one.
Let us leave these aside, I say, since wars come round only at intervals.
Let us consider what happens every single day.
There is, then, so great a number of noblemen who not only live idle themselves, like drones, on the labours of others, such as the tenants of their estates, whom they shave to the quick to raise their rents.
For that is the only thrift they know, men otherwise prodigal to the point of beggary; but they also carry about with them a huge crowd of idle retainers, who have never learnt any craft for earning a living.
As soon as their master has died, or they themselves have fallen ill, these are thrown out on the spot.
For men would rather feed the idle than the sick, and often the heir of a dying man cannot at once keep up his father's household.
Meanwhile these fellows go hungry in earnest, unless they rob in earnest.
For what are they to do?
For when, by wandering a little, they have worn out their clothes and their health, and are squalid with disease and covered in rags, the gentry do not deign to take them in, and the farmers do not dare; for they know well that a man brought up softly in idleness and luxury, who used to go girt with sword and buckler, looking down on the whole neighbourhood with a swaggering scoundrel's face and despising everyone beside himself, will be by no means fit to serve a poor man faithfully with spade and hoe, for mean wages and scant food.”
