Not only in the world of commerce but also in the world of ideas our age is staging a real clearance sale.
Everything is to be had at such a dirt-cheap price that it becomes a question whether in the end there is anyone who will bid.
Every speculative billiard-marker who conscientiously marks the significant progress of modern philosophy, every private lecturer, tutor, student, every smallholder and lodger in philosophy does not stop at doubting everything, but goes further.
Perhaps it would be untimely and ill-timed to ask them where they are actually going, but it is surely polite and modest to regard it as settled that they have doubted everything, since otherwise it would indeed be a strange thing to say that they went further.
This preliminary movement they have then all made, and presumably so easily that they do not find it necessary to let fall a word about how; for not even he who anxiously and with concern sought a little enlightenment found any, a guiding hint, a little dietary prescription for how one conducts oneself under this enormous task.
“But Cartesius has done it, surely?”
Cartesius, a venerable, humble, honest thinker, whose writings surely no one can read without the deepest emotion, he has done what he has said, and said what he has done.
Alas!
Alas!
Alas! that is a great rarity in our age!
Cartesius has, as he himself repeats often enough, not doubted with respect to faith.
(“Mindful nevertheless, as has already been said, that this natural light is to be trusted only so long as nothing contrary is revealed by God himself....
But above all else we must fix in our memory as the highest rule that what has been revealed to us by God is to be believed as the most certain of all; and even if perhaps the light of reason, however clear and evident, should seem to suggest something else to us, we must nevertheless put our faith in divine authority alone rather than in our own judgement.
Cf. Principia philosophiæ, part one, § 28 and § 76).
He has not cried Fire and made it a duty for everyone to doubt, for Cartesius was a quiet, solitary thinker, not a bawling night-watchman; he modestly confessed that his method had significance only for himself and had its ground partly in his earlier bungled knowledge.
(Let no one therefore think that I am going to set forth here some method which everyone ought to follow in order to direct his reason rightly; for I have resolved only to expound the one I myself have followed ...
But as soon as I had completed that course of studies (namely, of youth), at the end of which it is customary to be admitted to the ranks of the learned, I began to think quite otherwise.
For I found myself entangled in so many doubts and so many errors that I judged all my efforts at learning had profited me nothing except that I had uncovered my ignorance more and more.
Cf. Dissertatio de methodo pp. 2 and 3).
– What those old Greeks, who after all also understood a little about philosophy, took to be a task for a whole lifetime, because proficiency in doubting is not acquired in days and weeks; what the old veteran warrior attained, who had preserved the equilibrium of doubt through all ensnarements, dauntlessly denied the certainty of the senses and the certainty of thought, incorruptibly defied the anxiety of self-love and the insinuations of sympathy – with that everyone begins in our age.
In our age everyone does not stop at faith, but goes further.
A question about where they are going would perhaps be foolhardy; on the other hand it is surely a sign of good manners and cultivation that I assume that everyone has faith, since otherwise it becomes a strange thing to say: to go further.
In those old days it was otherwise; then faith was a task for a whole lifetime, because it was assumed that proficiency in believing is acquired neither in days nor in weeks.
When then the tried old man drew near his end, had fought the good fight and kept the faith, then his heart was young enough not to have forgotten that anxiety and trembling which disciplined the youth, which the man indeed mastered, but which no human being wholly outgrows – unless insofar as he should manage it by going further as early as possible.
Where those venerable figures arrived, there everyone in our age begins, in order to go further.
The present author is by no means a philosopher; he has not understood the System, whether it exists, whether it is finished; he already has enough for his weak head in the thought of what an enormous head everyone in our age must have, since everyone has such an enormous thought.
Even if one were able to transpose the whole content of faith into the form of the concept, it does not follow from this that one has comprehended faith, comprehended how one came into it, or how it came into one.
The present author is by no means a philosopher; he is, poetice et eleganter, an extra-clerk, who neither writes the System nor promises of the System, who neither pledges himself to the System nor signs himself over to the System.
He writes because to him it is a luxury, which gains in pleasantness and evidence the fewer there are who buy and read what he writes.
He easily foresees his fate in an age when one has struck a line through passion in order to serve science, in an age when an author who wants readers must take care to write in such a way that it can conveniently be leafed through during the after-dinner nap, and take care to shape his outward appearance in the likeness of that polite gardener's boy in the Advertiser, who with hat in hand and good references from the place where he last served recommends himself to a highly esteemed public.
He foresees his fate, to be entirely ignored; he has a presentiment of the terrible thing, that the zealous criticism will make him run the gauntlet several times; he dreads the still more terrible thing, that some enterprising registrar or other, a paragraph-swallower (who, to save science, is always willing to do to other people's writings what Trop, “to rescue taste”, magnanimously did to “The Destruction of the Human Race”) – will cut him up into §§, and do it with the same inflexibility as the man who, to serve the science of punctuation, divided up his speech by counting the words, so that 50 words went to a full stop and 35 to a semicolon.
– I fall down in deepest submissiveness before every systematic bag-searcher: “It is not the System, it has not the least thing to do with the System.
I call down all good upon the System and upon the Danish shareholders in this omnibus; for a tower it will hardly become.
I wish them all together and each in particular good fortune and blessing.”
Respectfully,
Johannes de silentio.
