If there were no eternal consciousness in a human being, if at the bottom of everything there lay only a wildly fermenting power which, writhing in dark passions, brought forth everything that was great and everything that was insignificant, if a bottomless emptiness, never satisfied, hid itself beneath everything, what then would life be but despair?
If it were so, if there were no sacred bond that knit humankind together, if one generation rose up after another like the leaves in the forest, if one generation replaced another like the song of birds in the forest, if the race passed through the world as the ship passes through the sea, as the wind through the desert, a thoughtless and fruitless deed, if an eternal oblivion, ever hungry, lurked for its prey, and there were no power strong enough to wrest it from its grasp – how empty and comfortless life would then be!
But for that very reason it is not so, and as God created man and woman, so he formed the hero and the poet or orator.
The latter can do nothing of what the former does, he can only admire, love, rejoice in the hero.
Yet he too is happy, no less than the hero; for the hero is as it were his better nature, with which he is in love, glad that it is not after all himself, so that his love can be admiration.
He is the genius of recollection, can do nothing but call to mind what has been done, do nothing but admire what has been done; he takes nothing of his own, but is jealous of what has been entrusted to him.
He follows his heart's choice, but when he has found what he sought, then he wanders about to every man's door with his song and with his speech, that all may admire the hero as he does, be proud of the hero, as he is.
This is his achievement, his humble work, this is his faithful service in the house of the hero.
If he thus remains true to his love, if he strives day and night against the cunning of oblivion, which would trick him out of his hero, then he has fulfilled his work, then he is gathered to the hero, who has loved him just as faithfully, for the poet is as it were the hero's better nature, powerless, to be sure, as a memory is, but also transfigured, as a memory is.
Therefore no one shall be forgotten who was great, and though it take longer, though the cloud of misunderstanding take the hero away, his lover comes nonetheless, and the longer the time that has passed, the more faithfully he clings to him.
No!
No one shall be forgotten who was great in the world; but each was great in his own way, and each in proportion to the greatness of what he loved.
For he who loved himself became great by himself, and he who loved other people became great by his devotion, but he who loved God became greater than all.
Each shall be remembered, but each became great in proportion to his expectation.
One became great by expecting the possible; another by expecting the eternal; but he who expected the impossible became greater than all.
Each shall be remembered, but each was great in proportion to the magnitude of what he strove with.
For he who strove with the world became great by overcoming the world, and he who strove with himself became greater by overcoming himself; but he who strove with God became greater than all.
Thus there was strife in the world, man against man, one against a thousand, but he who strove with God was greater than all.
Thus there was strife upon the earth: there was one who overcame all by his power, and there was one who overcame God by his powerlessness.
There was one who relied on himself and gained all, there was one who, secure in his strength, sacrificed all, but he who believed God was greater than all.
There was one who was great by his power, and one who was great by his wisdom, and one who was great by his hope, and one who was great by his love, but Abraham was greater than all, great by the power whose strength is powerlessness, great by the wisdom whose secret is foolishness, great by the hope whose form is madness, great by the love that is hatred of oneself.
