By faith Abraham went out from the land of his fathers and became a stranger in the land of promise.
He left one thing behind, took one thing with him; he left his earthly understanding behind, and took faith with him; otherwise he would surely not have gone out, but would have thought, this is indeed absurd.
By faith he was a stranger in the land of promise, and there was nothing that reminded him of what was dear, but everything by its newness tempted his soul to wistful longing.
And yet he was God's chosen one, in whom the Lord was well pleased!
Indeed, had he been an outcast, thrust away from God's grace, then he could better have grasped it, but now it was as a mockery of him and of his faith.
There was in the world also one who lived banished from the land of his fathers, which he loved.
He is not forgotten, nor are his laments, when in sorrow he sought and found what was lost.
Of Abraham there is no lament.
It is human to lament, human to weep with the one who weeps, but it is greater to believe, more blessed to behold the believer.
By faith Abraham received the promise, that in his seed all the generations of the earth should be blessed.
Time passed, the possibility was there, Abraham believed; time passed, it became absurd, Abraham believed.
There was one in the world who also had an expectation.
Time passed, evening drew on, he was not paltry enough to have forgotten his expectation, therefore he too shall not be forgotten.
Then he grieved, and grief did not deceive him, as life had done, it did for him all that it could, in the sweetness of grief he possessed his disappointed expectation.
It is human to grieve, it is human to grieve with the one who grieves, but it is greater to believe, more blessed to behold the believer.
Of Abraham we have no song of grief.
He did not sadly count the days as the seasons passed, he did not look at Sarah with suspicious glances, to see whether she was growing old, he did not halt the course of the sun, that Sarah should not age and with her his expectation, he did not sing to Sarah his sorrowful lay to lull her.
Abraham grew old, Sarah became a mockery in the land, and yet he was God's chosen one and heir to the promise, that in his seed all the generations of the earth should be blessed.
Would it not then have been better that he were not God's chosen one?
What is it to be God's chosen one?
Is it to be denied in youth the wish of youth, only to have it fulfilled with great difficulty in old age?
But Abraham believed and held fast to the promise.
If Abraham had wavered, then he would have given it up.
He would have said to God: “So perhaps it is not after all your will that it should happen, so I will give up the wish; it was my only one, it was my bliss.
My soul is sincere, I hide no secret grudge because you denied it.”
He would not have been forgotten, he would have saved many by his example, but still he would not have become the father of faith; for it is great to give up one's wish, but it is greater to hold it fast after having given it up; it is great to grasp the eternal, but it is greater to hold fast to the temporal after having given it up.
– Then came the fullness of time.
Had Abraham not believed, then Sarah would surely have died of sorrow, and Abraham, dulled by grief, would not have understood the fulfilment, but smiled at it as at a dream of youth.
But Abraham believed, therefore he was young; for he who always hopes for the best, he grows old, deceived by life, and he who is always prepared for the worst, he grows old early, but he who believes, he keeps an eternal youth.
Praised therefore be that story!
For Sarah, though advanced in years, was young enough to desire a mother's joy, and Abraham, though grey-haired, was young enough to wish to be a father.
In the outward sense the wonder lies in this, that it happened according to their expectation; in the deeper sense the wonder of faith lies in this, that Abraham and Sarah were young enough to wish, and that faith had preserved their wish and with it their youth.
He received the fulfilment of the promise, he received it in faith, and it happened according to the promise and according to faith; for Moses struck the rock with his staff, but he did not believe.
Then there was joy in Abraham's house, when Sarah stood as a bride on their golden wedding day.
