We read in those holy scriptures: “and God tempted Abraham, and said: Abraham, Abraham, where are you? but Abraham answered: here am I.”
You, to whom my speech is addressed, was this the case with you?
When far off you saw the heavy dispensations drawing near, did you not then say to the mountains, hide me, to the hills, fall upon me?
Or were you stronger, did not your foot still move slowly along the way, did it not long, as it were, to go back to the old tracks?
When you were called, did you then answer, or did you not answer, perhaps softly, and in a whisper?
Not so Abraham: gladly, boldly, trustingly, loudly he answered: here am I.
We read further: “and Abraham rose up early in the morning.”
As if it were to a feast, so he hastened, and early in the morning he was at the appointed place, on Mount Moriah.
He said nothing to Sarah, nothing to Eliezer; who, after all, could have understood him, had not the temptation by its very nature taken from him a vow of silence?
“He split the firewood, he bound Isaac, he kindled the fire, he drew the knife.”
My listener!
There was many a father who thought that in his child he lost what was dearest to him in the world, that he was robbed of every hope for the future; but there was, after all, no one who in that sense was the child of promise, as Isaac was for Abraham.
There was many a father who lost his child, but then it was God, the unchangeable and unsearchable will of the Almighty, it was his hand that took it.
Not so with Abraham.
For him a heavier trial was reserved, and Isaac's fate was laid, with the knife, in Abraham's hand.
And there he stood, the old man with his only hope!
But he did not doubt, he did not look anxiously to the right or to the left, he did not challenge heaven with his prayers.
He knew it was God the Almighty who tried him, he knew it was the heaviest sacrifice that could be demanded of him; but he knew also that no sacrifice was too heavy when God demanded it – and he drew the knife.
Who strengthened Abraham's arm, who held his right hand raised, that it did not sink down powerless!
He who looks upon this is paralysed.
Who strengthened Abraham's soul, that it did not go dark before his eyes, so that he saw neither Isaac nor the ram!
He who looks upon this is struck blind.
– And yet rare enough, perhaps, is the one who is paralysed and blinded, rarer still the one who worthily tells what happened.
We all know it – it was only a trial.
If Abraham, as he stood on Mount Moriah, had doubted, if at a loss he had looked about him, if, before he drew the knife, he had by chance caught sight of the ram, if God had allowed him to sacrifice it instead of Isaac – then he would have gone home, all would have been the same, he had Sarah, he kept Isaac, and yet how changed!
For his return would have been a flight, his deliverance an accident, his reward disgrace, his future perhaps perdition.
Then he would have borne witness neither to his faith nor to God's grace, but borne witness to how terrible it is to go up to Mount Moriah.
Then Abraham would not have been forgotten, nor Mount Moriah either.
It would then be named not like Ararat, where the Ark came to land, but named as a place of terror, because it was here that Abraham doubted.
Venerable Father Abraham!
When you went home from Mount Moriah, you needed no eulogy that could comfort you for what was lost; for you gained everything, and kept Isaac, was it not so?
The Lord took him from you no more, but you sat gladly at table with him in your tent, as you do yonder for all eternity.
Venerable Father Abraham!
Thousands of years have run their course since those days, but you need no belated lover to snatch your memory from the power of oblivion; for every tongue remembers you – and yet you reward your lover more gloriously than anyone does: you make him blessed yonder in your bosom, you captivate here his eye and his heart by the wonder of your deed.
Venerable Father Abraham!
Second father of the race!
You who first felt and bore witness to that immense passion which scorns the terrible fight with the raging of the elements and the forces of creation in order to strive with God, you who first knew that highest passion, the holy, pure, humble expression of the divine madness that was admired by the pagans – forgive him who would speak in your praise, if he did not do it rightly.
He spoke humbly, as was his heart's desire, he spoke briefly, as is fitting, but he shall never forget that you needed 100 years to get a son of old age against expectation, that you had to draw the knife before you kept Isaac; he shall never forget that in 130 years you got no further than faith.
