Yet so it was not to be; once more Abraham was to be tried.
He had fought with that crafty power which invents everything, with that watchful enemy which never slumbers, with that old man who outlives everything, – he had fought with time and kept his faith.
Now all the terror of the struggle was gathered into one moment.
“And God tempted Abraham and said unto him, take Isaac, your only son, whom you love, go into the land of Moriah and offer him there for a burnt offering upon a mountain which I will show you.”
So then all was lost, more terribly than if it had never happened!
So the Lord was only mocking Abraham!
Wondrously he had made the absurd actual, now he would see it brought to nothing again.
It was indeed a folly, but Abraham did not laugh at it, as Sarah did when the promise was announced.
All was lost! Seventy years of faithful expectation, the brief joy at the fulfilment of faith.
Who then is he who snatches the staff from the old man, who is he who demands that he himself shall break it!
Who is he who makes a man's grey hairs comfortless, who is he who demands that he himself shall do it!
Is there no compassion for the venerable old man, none for the innocent child!
And yet Abraham was God's chosen one, and it was the Lord who laid the trial upon him.
All was now to be lost!
The glorious remembrance of the generations, the promise in Abraham's seed, it was only a whim, a fleeting thought which the Lord had had, which Abraham was now to blot out.
That glorious treasure, which was as old as the faith in Abraham's heart, many many years older than Isaac, the fruit of Abraham's life, hallowed by prayers, ripened in struggles – the blessing on Abraham's lips, this fruit was now to be torn off before its time and be without meaning; for what meaning had it, if Isaac was to be sacrificed!
That sorrowful yet blessed hour, when Abraham was to take leave of all that was dear to him, when he was once more to lift up his venerable head, when his countenance was to shine like the Lord's, when he was to gather his whole soul into a blessing that was mighty to make Isaac blessed all his days – this hour was not to come!
For Abraham was indeed to take leave of Isaac, but in such a way that he himself would remain behind; death was to part them, but in such a way that Isaac became its prey.
The old man was not, gladly in death, to lay his hand in blessing upon Isaac, but, weary of life, to lay violent hands upon Isaac.
And it was God who tried him.
Yes, woe!
Woe to the messenger who had come before Abraham with such tidings!
Who would have dared to be this envoy of sorrow?
But it was God who tried Abraham.
Yet Abraham believed, and believed for this life.
Indeed, had his faith been only for a life to come, then he would surely more easily have cast everything away, in order to hasten out of the world to which he did not belong.
But Abraham's faith was not of that kind, if there is such a kind; for really it is not faith, but the remotest possibility of faith, which at the very edge of the horizon senses its object, yet separated from it by a yawning abyss, within which despair plays its game.
But Abraham believed precisely for this life, that he would grow old in the land, honoured among the people, blessed in his offspring, unforgettable in Isaac, the dearest thing in his life, whom he embraced with a love for which it was only a poor expression to say that he faithfully fulfilled the father's duty to love the son, as indeed the summons itself says: the son whom you love.
Jacob had twelve sons and one he loved; Abraham had only one, whom he loved.
But Abraham believed and did not doubt, he believed the absurd.
If Abraham had doubted – then he would have done something else, something great and glorious; for how could Abraham do anything but what is great and glorious!
He would have gone out to Mount Moriah, he would have split the firewood, kindled the fire, drawn the knife – he would have cried out to God: “Spurn not this sacrifice, it is not the best that I own, that I know well; for what is an old man compared with the child of promise, but it is the best that I can give you.
Let Isaac never come to know it, so that he may take comfort in his youth.”
He would have plunged the knife into his own breast.
He would have been admired in the world, and his name would not have been forgotten; but it is one thing to be admired, another to become a guiding star that saves the anguished.
But Abraham believed.
He did not pray for himself, that he might move the Lord; it was only when the just punishment went forth over Sodom and Gomorrah that Abraham came forward with his prayers.
