“And God tempted Abraham and said unto him, Take Isaac, thine only son, whom thou lovest, and go into the land of Moriah and offer him there for a burnt offering upon a mountain which I will shew thee.”
It was early in the morning, Abraham rose early, he had the asses saddled, left his tent, and Isaac with him, but Sarah looked out of the window after them, down through the valley, until she saw them no more.
They rode in silence for 3 days; on the morning of the 4th day Abraham said not even a word, but lifted up his eyes and saw Mount Moriah in the distance.
He left the young men behind and went up alone with Isaac by the hand to the mountain.
But Abraham said to himself: “I will not after all hide from Isaac where this way is leading him.”
He stood still, he laid his hand on Isaac's head in blessing, and Isaac bowed to receive it.
And Abraham's countenance was fatherliness, his gaze was gentle, his speech admonishing.
But Isaac could not understand him, his soul could not be lifted up; he clasped Abraham's knees, he pleaded at his feet, he begged for his young life, for his fair hopes, he recalled the joy in Abraham's house, he recalled the sorrow and the loneliness.
Then Abraham raised the boy up and walked with him by his hand, and his words were full of comfort and admonition.
But Isaac could not understand him.
He climbed Mount Moriah, but Isaac did not understand him.
Then he turned away from him for a moment, but when Isaac saw Abraham's countenance a second time, then it was changed, his gaze was wild, his form was horror.
He seized Isaac by the breast, threw him to the ground and said: “Stupid boy, do you believe I am your father?
I am an idolater.
Do you believe it is God's command?
No, it is my desire.”
Then Isaac trembled and cried out in his anguish: “God in heaven, have mercy on me, God of Abraham, have mercy on me; if I have no father on earth, then be Thou my father!”
But Abraham said softly to himself: “Lord in heaven, I thank Thee; it is after all better that he believes I am a monster than that he should lose faith in Thee.”
When the child is to be weaned, the mother blackens her breast; it would indeed be a sin for the breast to look delightful when the child is not to have it.
So the child believes that the breast has changed, but the mother, she is the same, her gaze is loving and tender as always.
Happy the one who did not need more terrible means to wean the child!
