While they were deliberating on this, the king had already changed his formation to the same arrangement and set his battle line facing them, just as when he had first come to fight.
When the Greeks saw that they were near and drawn up for battle, they raised the paean again and advanced with even greater eagerness than before.
The barbarians, for their part, did not wait for them, but fled from a greater distance than before;
and the Greeks pursued them as far as a certain village;
there the Greeks halted;
for above the village there was a hill, on which the king’s men rallied, no longer infantry, but the hill was filled with horsemen, so that the Greeks could not make out what was going on.
And they said that they saw the royal standard, a kind of golden eagle with outspread wings on a shield, raised on a pole.
But when the Greeks advanced there too, the horsemen abandon the hill as well;
not in a body any longer, but some from one side and some from another;
the hill was gradually stripped of horsemen;
and in the end they had all withdrawn.
So Clearchus did not lead the army up the hill, but halted it at its foot and sends Lycius the Syracusan and another man up the hill, and tells them to look at what was beyond the hill and report back what it was.
And Lycius rode up, looked, and reports that they are fleeing as fast as they can.
About the time this happened, the sun was also setting.
There the Greeks halted, grounded their arms and rested;
and at the same time they wondered that Cyrus was nowhere to be seen and that no one else came to them from him;
for they did not know that he was dead, but guessed that he had either gone off in pursuit or ridden ahead to seize some position;
and they discussed among themselves whether they should stay where they were and have the baggage brought there, or go back to the camp.
They decided to go back;
and they reach the tents about suppertime.
This was how that day ended.
They find most of their other property plundered, and any food or drink there was, and the wagons full of flour and wine which Cyrus had got ready so that, if the army was ever in serious want, he could distribute it to the Greeks (there were four hundred of these wagons, it was said), these too the king’s men had then plundered.
So most of the Greeks had no supper;
they had had no breakfast either;
for the king had appeared before the army could halt for breakfast.
So that was how they got through this night.
