It was, however, generally agreed that he honoured men who were brave in war above all others.
His first war was against the Pisidians and the Mysians;
campaigning in person in these lands, he made those whom he saw willing to face danger governors of the territory he conquered, and then honoured them with other gifts as well;
so that the brave appeared the most fortunate of men, while the cowards were thought fit to be their slaves.
Accordingly he had a great abundance of men willing to face danger wherever they thought Cyrus would notice.
As for justice, if anyone was plainly eager to display it, he made it his first concern to make such men richer than those who loved gain by unjust means.
And so, among many other things that were justly managed for him, he also had a true army at his service.
For generals and captains who had sailed to him for the sake of money recognised that it paid better to obey Cyrus well than to earn their monthly pay.
Moreover, if anyone carried out well a task he had set, he never let his zeal go unrewarded.
That, then, is why Cyrus was said to have had the best servants for every kind of task.
And if he saw someone who was a skilful administrator on the basis of justice, who developed the land he governed and made it yield revenue, he would never take anything away from him, but always gave him more besides;
so they both worked gladly and acquired wealth with confidence, and whatever a man had gained he hid least of all from Cyrus;
for he was plainly not jealous of those who were openly rich, but tried to make use of the wealth of those who hid it.
As for friends, all whom he made and knew to be well disposed and judged capable of helping him in whatever he happened to want to accomplish, everyone agrees that he was the very best at looking after them.
For the very thing for which he thought he himself needed friends, namely to have helpers, he himself also tried to be for his friends: the best helper in whatever he saw each of them desiring.
He received, I think, more gifts than any other single man, for many reasons;
and these above all things he distributed to his friends, taking into account the character of each and what he saw each most needed.
