So Cyrus died, the most kingly and the most worthy to rule of all the Persians who have lived since Cyrus the Elder, as all agree who are thought to have known Cyrus personally.
For first, while he was still a boy, when he was being educated with his brother and the other boys, he was thought the best of them all in everything.
For all the sons of the noblest Persians are educated at the King's court;
there one can learn much self-discipline, and there is nothing shameful to be heard or seen.
The boys see and hear of some men being honoured by the king, and others being disgraced;
so from their boyhood they learn both to rule and to be ruled.
There Cyrus was thought, first, to be the most modest of those his age, and more obedient to his elders than even those of lower rank than himself; and next, the fondest of horses and the best horseman;
they also judged him the keenest to learn and the most diligent in the skills of war, archery and throwing the javelin.
When he reached the right age, he was also very fond of hunting, and indeed very ready to face danger against wild animals.
Once, when a bear charged him, he did not flinch, but grappled with it and was dragged from his horse; he received wounds whose scars he still bore, but in the end he killed it;
and the man who first came to his help he made an object of envy to many.
When he was sent down by his father as satrap of Lydia, Greater Phrygia and Cappadocia, and was appointed general of all those whose duty it is to muster in the plain of Castolus, he first showed that he counted it of the greatest importance, if he made a truce with anyone, or an agreement, or a promise, never to break his word.
And so the cities that were entrusted to him trusted him, and the men trusted him;
and if anyone had been an enemy, once Cyrus had made a truce with him he trusted that he would suffer nothing in breach of the truce.
Accordingly, when he went to war with Tissaphernes, all the cities chose Cyrus of their own free will instead of Tissaphernes, except the Milesians;
and these feared him because he would not abandon the exiles.
For he showed in deed and said in words that he would never abandon them, once he had become their friend, not even if they became still fewer and fared still worse.
It was also plain that, if anyone did him good or harm, he tried to outdo him;
and some people reported a prayer of his, that he prayed to live long enough to outdo in return both those who did him good and those who did him harm.
And so more people were eager to give up to him their money, their cities and their own lives than to any other single man of our time.
Nor again could anyone say that he let wrongdoers and criminals laugh at him; he punished them more mercilessly than anyone;
along the busy roads one could often see men who had lost feet or hands or eyes;
so that in Cyrus' province any Greek or barbarian who did no wrong could travel without fear wherever he wished, carrying whatever suited him.
