Cyrus saw the Greeks winning against the enemy facing them and pursuing, and though he was pleased and already being paid homage as king by those around him, even so he was not drawn into the pursuit, but kept the troop of six hundred horsemen with him close together and watched what the king would do.
For he knew that the king held the centre of the Persian army.
Indeed all the commanders of the barbarians lead from the centre of their own forces, thinking that in this way they are safest, if their strength is on either side of them, and that if they need to pass on an order, the army will receive it in half the time.
And so the king at that time, though he held the centre of his own army, was nevertheless beyond Cyrus' left wing.
Since no one was fighting him from the front, nor the troops drawn up before him, he began to wheel round as if to encircle them.
Then Cyrus, afraid that he would get behind the Greek force and cut it to pieces, rode out against him;
He charged with his six hundred, defeated those drawn up in front of the king and put the six thousand to flight, and he is said to have killed their commander Artagerses with his own hand.
When the rout came, Cyrus' six hundred also scattered as they dashed off in pursuit, and only a very few were left around him, mostly the so-called table companions.
While he was with these, he caught sight of the king and the mass of troops around him;
at once he could not hold back, but saying ‘I see the man’ he charged at him, struck him on the chest and wounded him through his breastplate, as Ctesias the physician says; and Ctesias says that he healed the wound himself.
As he was striking, someone hit him hard with a javelin under the eye;
and in the fighting there between the king and Cyrus and those around them on behalf of each, Ctesias tells how many of the king's men died;
for he was with him;
Cyrus himself was killed, and eight of the bravest of his companions lay dead upon him.
Artapates, the most faithful of his sceptre-bearing attendants, is said to have leapt from his horse when he saw Cyrus fallen, and to have thrown himself upon him.
Some say that the king ordered someone to kill him upon Cyrus' body, others that he drew his dagger and killed himself over him;
for he had a golden one;
and he wore a necklace and bracelets and the other ornaments that the noblest Persians wear;
for he had been honoured by Cyrus for his devotion and loyalty.
