There they stayed three days and gathered provisions.
From there he marched thirteen desert stages, ninety parasangs, keeping the river Euphrates on his right, and arrived at Pylae.
During these stages many of the pack animals died of hunger;
for there was no fodder, nor any tree at all, but the whole country was bare;
the inhabitants quarried millstones beside the river and shaped them, took them to Babylon and sold them, and lived by buying grain in exchange.
The army ran out of grain, and it could not be bought except in the Lydian market in Cyrus’ barbarian army, at four sigli for a capithe of wheat flour or barley meal.
The siglus is worth seven and a half Attic obols;
and the capithe held two Attic choenices.
So the soldiers got through by eating meat.
Some of these stages he made very long, whenever he wanted to push through to water or to fodder.
And once, when a narrow place and mud appeared that the wagons could hardly get through, Cyrus halted with the noblest and richest of his entourage and ordered Glus and Pigres to take some of the barbarian troops and help get the wagons out.
When they seemed to him to be going about it slowly, he ordered, as if in anger, the noblest Persians around him to help hurry the wagons along.
Then indeed one could see a sample of their discipline.
For they threw off their purple cloaks wherever each happened to be standing and rushed forward as someone would run for victory, and down a steep hillside too, wearing those costly tunics and embroidered trousers, some even with torques round their necks and bracelets on their arms;
and at once they jumped into the mud in all this finery and brought the wagons out, lifted clear, faster than anyone would have thought.
On the whole Cyrus was plainly hurrying the entire way and not lingering, except where he halted for provisions or for some other necessity, because he thought that the faster he came, the less prepared the king would be when he fought him, and the more slowly, the larger the army the king would gather.
And anyone who paid attention could see that the king’s empire was strong in its extent of land and number of people, but weak because of the length of its roads and the dispersal of its forces, if one made war swiftly.
