He said that Cyrus began his speech like this.
I have called you here, my friends, so that I may consult with you and do what is just, in the eyes of both gods and men, regarding Orontas here.
For in the first place my father gave this man to me to be my subject;
and when, on the orders, as he said himself, of my brother, this man made war on me while holding the acropolis at Sardis, and I, by fighting back against him, brought him to decide to stop his war against me, and I received his right hand and gave him mine, after that, he said, Orontas, have I done you any wrong?
He answered that he had not.
Cyrus asked again:
Then later, as you yourself admit, though you were not wronged by me at all, did you not revolt to the Mysians and ravage my land as far as you could?
Orontas said yes.
Then, said Cyrus, when you realised in turn how weak your own power was, did you not go to the altar of Artemis and say that you repented, and after persuading me, did you not again give me pledges and receive them from me?
Orontas admitted this too.
What wrong, then, said Cyrus, have I done you, that you have now been caught plotting against me for the third time?
When Orontas said that he had not been wronged at all, Cyrus asked him:
Do you admit, then, that you have acted wrongly towards me?
I must, said Orontas.
After this Cyrus asked again:
Could you still become an enemy to my brother, and a friend and loyal to me?
He answered that even if he did, Cyrus, he would never again seem so to him.
At this Cyrus said to those present:
This is what the man has done, and this is what he says;
you first of all, Clearchus, give us your opinion, what you think.
Clearchus said this.
My advice is to put this man out of the way as quickly as possible, so that we need no longer guard against him, but may have leisure, as far as he is concerned, to do good to those who are willing friends.
He said that the others too agreed with this opinion.
After this, he said, at Cyrus’ command they all stood up, his kinsmen too, and took Orontas by the belt, as a sign he was condemned to death;
then those who had been given the task led him out.
When those who had formerly bowed down before him saw him, they bowed down even then, though they knew that he was being led to his death.
After he had been taken into the tent of Artapates, the most trusted of Cyrus’ staff-bearers, from then on no one ever saw Orontas alive or dead, and no one could say from knowledge how he died;
people guessed, some one way, some another;
but no grave of his was ever seen.
