There, at the review under arms, the count came to ten thousand four hundred shields of the Greeks and two thousand five hundred peltasts, and of the barbarians with Cyrus a hundred thousand, with about twenty scythed chariots.
Of the enemy there were said to be one million two hundred thousand, and two hundred scythed chariots.
There were besides six thousand horsemen, commanded by Artagerses;
these were drawn up in front of the king himself.
The king's army had four commanders, generals and leaders, each of three hundred thousand men: Abrocomas, Tissaphernes, Gobryas and Arbaces.
Of these, nine hundred thousand were present at the battle, with a hundred and fifty scythed chariots;
for Abrocomas arrived five days too late for the battle, marching from Phoenicia.
This was reported to Cyrus before the battle by men who had deserted from the enemy, from the Great King, and after the battle those of the enemy who were captured later reported the same.
From there Cyrus marched one stage, three parasangs, with his whole army, both Greek and barbarian, drawn up in battle order;
for he expected the king to fight on that day;
for halfway along this stage there was a deep dug trench, five fathoms wide and three fathoms deep.
The trench stretched inland across the plain for twelve parasangs, as far as the Wall of Media.
There are the canals, flowing from the river Tigris;
there are four of them, a plethron wide and very deep, and grain ships sail on them;
they flow into the Euphrates, they are a parasang apart from each other, and there are bridges over them.
Along the Euphrates there was a narrow passage between the river and the trench, about twenty feet wide;
The Great King had this trench made as a defence, when he learned that Cyrus was advancing.
Through this passage, then, Cyrus and his army went, and they were inside the trench.
On that day, then, the king did not fight, but many tracks of horses and men were clearly visible as they retreated.
Then Cyrus summoned Silanus, the seer from Ambracia, and gave him three thousand darics, because ten days before, while sacrificing, he had told him that the king would not fight within ten days, and Cyrus had said:
‘Then he will not fight at all, if he does not fight within these days;
but if you prove right, I promise you ten talents.’
This money he paid him then, since the ten days had passed.
Since the king had not stopped Cyrus' army from crossing at the trench, both Cyrus and the others thought that he had given up the idea of fighting;
so on the next day Cyrus marched on rather carelessly.
On the third day he was making the march seated on his chariot, with only a few men in formation in front of him, while most of his army marched in disorder, and many of the soldiers' weapons were carried on wagons and pack animals.
