And whatever anyone sent him for his personal use, whether for war or for adornment, about these things too they said that he used to say that his own body could not be adorned with all of them, but that he considered friends finely adorned the greatest adornment a man could have.
That he outdid his friends in great benefits is nothing surprising, since he was in fact more powerful;
but that he surpassed his friends in thoughtfulness and in eagerness to please them, this to my mind is more admirable.
For Cyrus would often send jars of wine half full, whenever he got a very sweet one, with the message that he had not come across a sweeter wine than this for a long time;
‘so he has sent this to you, and asks you to drink it up today with those you love most.’
Often too he sent half-eaten geese and halves of loaves and other such things, telling the bearer to add these words:
‘Cyrus enjoyed these;
so he wants you to taste them too.’
And wherever fodder was very scarce, but he himself could get it because he had many servants and because of his forethought, he would send round and tell his friends to give this fodder to the horses that carried them, so that they might not carry his friends while going hungry.
And whenever he was on the march and very many people were going to see him, he would call his friends to him and talk seriously with them, to show whom he honoured.
So I at least, from what I hear, judge that no one, whether Greek or barbarian, has been loved by more people.
Here is further proof of this.
No one ever left Cyrus, though he was a subject, to go over to the king, except that Orontas attempted it;
and he quickly found that the man he thought loyal to him was more a friend to Cyrus than to himself;
but from the king many went over to Cyrus, once they had become enemies of each other, and these indeed were the men the king loved most, because they believed that if they proved good men with Cyrus they would win more worthy honour than with the king.
A great proof too is what happened to him at the end of his life, that he was himself a good man and could judge rightly who were loyal, well disposed and steadfast.
For when he was killed, all the friends and table-companions around him died fighting for Cyrus, except Ariaeus;
he happened to be posted on the left wing in command of the cavalry;
and when he learned that Cyrus had fallen, he fled, taking with him the whole force that he commanded.
