From there he marched through Babylonia three stages, twelve parasangs.
At the third stage Cyrus held a review of the Greeks and the barbarians on the plain, around midnight;
for he thought that at the next dawn the king would arrive with his army to fight;
and he ordered Clearchus to command the right wing and Menon the Thessalian the left, while he himself drew up his own troops.
After the review, at daybreak, deserters who had come from the Great King brought Cyrus news about the king’s army.
Cyrus called together the generals and captains of the Greeks and consulted them on how he should fight the battle, and he himself encouraged them with words like these.
Men of Greece, it is not because I lack barbarian troops that I bring you as allies, but because I think you are better and stronger than many barbarians: that is why I have taken you on.
See to it, then, that you prove men worthy of the freedom you possess and for which I count you fortunate.
For be sure that I would choose freedom in place of all that I have and many times more besides.
And so that you may know what kind of contest you are going into, I, who know, will explain it to you.
Their numbers are great, and they will come on with a great deal of shouting;
but if you hold out against this, for the rest I think I am even ashamed at what sort of people you will find the inhabitants of this land to be.
If you are men and my affairs turn out well, I will make any of you who wants to go home the envy of those at home when he returns, but I think I shall make many prefer what they have with me to what they have at home.
At this point Gaulites, who was there, a Samian exile but loyal to Cyrus, said:
But, Cyrus, some say that you are promising a great deal now because you are in such a position with danger approaching, but if anything turns out well, they say you will not remember;
and some say that even if you did remember and were willing, you would not be able to pay all that you promise.
When Cyrus heard this, he said:
Well, men, the empire of my fathers extends southward to where men cannot live because of the heat, and northward to where they cannot because of the cold;
All the lands between these are governed as satrapies by my brother's friends.
If we win, we must make our own friends masters of these lands.
So what I fear is not that I shall have nothing to give each of my friends, if things go well, but that I shall not have enough friends to give it to.
And to each of you Greeks I shall also give a golden crown.
When they heard this, they themselves were far more eager, and they reported it to the others.
The generals and some of the other Greeks went in to him, asking to know what they would get if they were victorious.
He filled the hopes of all of them and sent them away.
All who spoke with him urged him not to fight himself, but to take his position behind them.
At this moment Clearchus asked Cyrus something like this:
‘Do you really think, Cyrus, that your brother will fight you?’
‘By Zeus,’ said Cyrus, ‘if he is really the son of Darius and Parysatis and my brother, I shall not take all this without a fight.’
