Then Cyrus’ head and right hand were cut off.
The king and those with him, in pursuit, burst into Cyrus’ camp;
and Ariaeus’ men no longer stand their ground, but flee through their own camp to the stopping-place from which they had set out;
the distance was said to be four parasangs.
The king and his men plunder a great deal of everything else, and he takes the Phocaean woman, Cyrus’ concubine, who was said to be clever and beautiful.
But the Milesian woman, the younger one, after being seized by the king’s men, escapes without her outer clothes to the Greeks who happened to be under arms among the baggage and who, forming up against the plunderers, killed many of them, though some of their own men also died;
yet they did not flee, but saved both her and everything else, all the property and people that were within their lines.
At this point the king and the Greeks were about thirty stades apart, the one side pursuing those opposite them as if victorious over all, the other plundering as if already all victorious.
When the Greeks learned that the king with his army was among the baggage, and the king for his part heard from Tissaphernes that the Greeks were victorious over the troops opposite them and had gone forward in pursuit, then the king gathers his men and forms them up, while Clearchus called Proxenus (for he was nearest) and discussed with him whether they should send some men or all go to the camp to its rescue.
Meanwhile the king too could clearly be seen coming on again, as it seemed, from behind.
The Greeks turned about and prepared to receive him, thinking he would attack on that side, but the king did not lead his men that way; instead, by the way he had passed outside the left wing, by that same way he led them back, picking up both those who had deserted to the Greeks during the battle and Tissaphernes and his men.
For Tissaphernes had not fled in the first clash, but had charged through along the river past the Greek peltasts;
as he charged through he killed no one, but the Greeks opened their ranks and struck and threw javelins at his men;
Episthenes of Amphipolis commanded the peltasts and was said to have shown good sense.
At any rate Tissaphernes, when he got away with the worst of it, does not turn back again, but on reaching the Greek camp he meets the king there, and together they formed up again and advanced.
When they were opposite the left wing of the Greeks, the Greeks feared that they would advance against the wing, outflank them on both sides and cut them down;
and they decided to fold back the wing and put the river at their rear.
