Pine-trees gendered whilome upon soaring Peliac summit
Swam (as the tale is told) through liquid surges of Neptune
Far as the Phasis-flood and frontier-land Aeetean;
Whenas the youths elect, of Argive vigour the oak-heart,
Longing the Golden Fleece of the Colchis-region to harry,
Dared in a poop swift-paced to span salt seas and their shallows,
Sweeping the deep blue seas with sweeps a-carven of fir-wood.
She, that governing Goddess of citadels crowning the cities,
Builded herself their car fast-flitting with lightest of breezes,
Weaving plants of the pine conjoined in curve of the kelson;
Foremost of all to imbue rude Amphitrite with ship-lore.
Soon as her beak had burst through wind-rackt spaces of ocean,
While the oar-tortured wave with spumy whiteness was blanching,
Surged from the deep abyss and hoar-capped billows the faces
Seaborn, Nereids eyeing theprodigy wonder-smitten.
There too mortal orbs through softened spendours regarded
Ocean-nymphs who exposed bodies denuded of raiment
Bare to the breast upthrust from hoar froth capping the sea-depths.
Then Thetis Peleus fired (men say) a-sudden with love,
Then Thetis nowise spurned to mate and marry with mortal,
Then Thetis’ Sire himself her yoke with Peleus sanctioned.
Oh, in those happier days now fondly yearned-for, you heroes
Born; (all hail!) of the gods begotten, and excellent issue
Bred by your mothers, all hail! and placid deal me your favour.
Oft with the sound of me, in strains and spells I’ll invoke you;
You too by wedding-torch so happily, highly augmented,
Peleus, Thessaly ’s ward, in whose favor himself, Jupiter
The Father of the gods, resigned his passions.
You Thetis, fairest of maids Nereian, vouchsafed to marry?
You did Tethys empower to woo and wed with her grandchild;
Nor less Oceanus, with water compassing th’ Earth-globe?
But when ended the term, and wisht-for light of the day-tide
Uprose, flocks to the house in concourse mighty, convened,
Thessaly all, with glad assembly the Palace fulfilling:
Presents afore they bring, and joy in faces declare they.
Cieros abides a desert: they quit Phthiotican Tempe,
Homesteads of Crannon-town, eke bulwarkt walls Larissa;
Meeting at Pharsalus , and roof Pharsalian seeking.
None will the fields now till; soft wax all necks the oxen,
Never the humble vine is purged by curve of the rake-tooth,
Never a pruner’s hook thins out the shade of the tree-tufts,
Never a bull up-plows broad glebe with bend of the coulter,
Over whose point unuse displays the squalor of rust-stain.
But in the homestead’s heart, where’er that opulent palace
Hides a retreat, all shines with splendour of gold and of silver.
Ivory blanches the seats, bright gleam the flagons a-table,
All of the mansion joys in royal riches and grandeur.
But for the Diva’s use bestrewn is the genial bedstead,
Hidden in midmost stead, and its polisht framework of Indian
Tusk underlies its cloth empurpled by juice of the dye-shell.
This be a figured cloth with forms of manhood primeval
Showing by marvel-art the gifts and graces of heroes.
Here upon Dia’s strand wave-resonant, ever-regarding
Theseus borne from sight outside by fleet of the fleetest,
Stands Ariadne with heart full-filled with furies unbated,
Nor can her sense as yet believe she ’spies the espied,
When like one that awakes new roused from slumber deceptive,
Sees she her hapless self lone left on loneliest sandbank:
While as the mindless youth with oars disturbeth the shallows,
Casts to the windy storms what vows he vainly had vowed.
Him through the sedges afar the sad-eyed maiden of Minos,
Likest a Bacchant-girl stone-carven, (O her sorrow!)
’Spies, a-tossing the while on sorest billows of love-care.
Now no more on her blood-hued hair fine fillets retains she,
No more now light veil conceals her bosom erst hidden,
Now no more smooth zone contains her milky-hued paplets:
All gear dropping adown from every part of her person
Thrown, lie fronting her feet to the briny wavelets a sea-toy.
But at such now no more of her veil or her fillet a-floating
Had she regard: on you, Theseus! all of her heart-strength,
All of her sprite, her mind, forlorn, were evermore hanging.
Ah, sad soul, by grief and grievance driven beside you,
Sowed Erycina first those brambly cares in thy bosom,
What while issuing fierce with will enstarkened, Theseus
Forth from thebow-bent shore Piraean putting a-seawards
Reacht the Gortynian roofs where dwelt the injurious Monarch.
For ’twas told of yore how forced by pestilence cruel,
Eke as a blood rite due for the Androgeonian murder,
Many a chosen youth and the bloom of damsels unmarried
Food for the Minotaur, Cecropia was wont to befurnish.
Seeing his narrow walls in such wise vexed with evils,
Theseus of freest will for dear-loved Athens his body
Offered a victim so that no more to Crete be deported
Lives by Cecropia doomed to burials burying nowise;
Then with a swifty ship and soft breathed breezes a-stirring,
Sought he Minos the Haughty where homed in proudest of Mansions.
Him as with yearning glance forthright espied the royal
Maiden, whom pure chaste couch aspiring delicate odours
Cherisht, in soft embrace of a mother comforted all-whiles,
(E’en as the myrtles begot by the flowing floods of Eurotas,
Or as the tincts distinct brought forth by breath of the springtide)
Never the burning lights of her eyes from gazing upon him
Turned she, before fierce flame in all her body conceived she
Down in its deepest depths and burning within her marrow.
Ah, with unmitigate heart exciting wretchedmost furies,
You, Boy sacrosanct! man’s grief and gladness commingling,
You too of Golgos Queen and Lady of leafy Idalium ,
Whelm’d you in what manner waves that maiden fantasy-fired,
All for a blond-haired youth suspiring many a singulf!
Whiles how dire was the dread she dreed in languishing heart-strings;
How yet more, ever more, with golden splendour she paled!
Whenas yearning to mate his might with the furious monster
Theseus braved his death or sought the prizes of praises.
Then of her gifts to gods not ingrate, nor profiting naught,
Promise with silent lip, addressed she timidly vowing.
For as an oak that shakes on topmost summit of Taurus
Its boughs, or cone-growing pine from bole bark resin exuding,
Whirlwind of passing might that twists the stems with its storm-blasts,
Uproots, deracinates, forthright its trunk to the farthest,
Prone falls, shattering wide what lies in line of its downfall,—
Thus was that wildling flung by Theseus and vanquisht of body,
Vainly tossing its horns and goring the wind to no purpose.
Thence with abounding praise returned he, guiding his footsteps,
While a fine drawn thread checked steps in wander abounding,
Lest when issuing forth of the winding maze labyrinthine
Baffled become his track by inobservable error.
But for what cause should I, from early subject digressing,
Tell of the daughter who the face of her sire unseeing,
Eke her sister’s embrace nor less her mother’s endearments,
Who in despair bewept her hapless child that so gladly
Chose before every and each the lively wooing of Theseus?
Or how borne by the ship to the yeasting shore-line of Dia
Came she? or how when bound her eyes in bondage of slumber
Left her that chosen mate with mind unmindful departing?
Often (they tell) with heart inflamed by fiery fury
Poured she shrilling of shrieks from deepest depths of her bosom;
Now she would sadly scale the broken faces of mountains,
Whence she might overglance the boundless boiling of billows,
Then she wouldrush to bestem the salt-plain’s quivering wavelet
And from her ankles bare the dainty garment uplifting,
Spoke she these words (’tis said) from sorrow’s deepest abysses,
While from her tear-drencht face outburst cold shivering sobs.
Thus from my patrial shore, O traitor, hurried to exile,
Me on a lonely strand hast left, perfidious Theseus?
Thus wise farest, despite the godhead of Deities spurned,
(Reckless, alas!) to your home convoying perjury-curses?
Naught, then, ever availed that mind of cruelest counsel
Alter? No saving grace in you was evermore ready,
That to have pity on me vouchsafed your pitiless bosom?
Nevertheless not in past time such were the promises wordy
Lavished; nor such hopes to me the hapless were bidden;
But the glad married joys, the longed-for pleasures of wedlock.
All now empty and vain, by breath of the breezes bescattered!
Now, let woman no more trust her to man when he sweareth,
Ne’er let her hope to find or truth or faith in his pleadings,
Who when lustful thought forelooks to somewhat attaining,
Never an oath they fear, shall spare no promise to promise.
Yet no sooner they sate all lewdness and lecherous fancy,
Nothing remember of words and reck they naught of fore-swearing.
Certes, you did I snatch from midmost whirlpool of ruin
Deadly, and held it cheap loss of a brother to suffer
Rather than fail your need (O false!) at hour the supremest.
Therefore my limbs are doomed to be torn of birds, and of ferals
Prey, nor shall upheapt Earth afford a grave to my body.
Say me, what lioness bare you ’neath lone rock of the desert?
What sea spued you conceived from out the spume of his surges!
What manner Syrt, what ravening Scylla, what vasty Charybdis?
you who for sweet life saved such meeds are lief of returning!
If never willed your breast with me to mate you in marriage,
Hating the savage law decreed by primitive parent,
Still of your competence ’twas within your household to home me,
Where I might serve as slave in gladsome service familiar,
Laving your snow-white feet in clearest chrystalline waters
Or with its purpling gear your couch in company strewing.
Yet for what cause should I complain in vain to the winds that unknow me,
(I so beside me with grief!) which ne’er of senses endued
Hear not the words sent forth nor aught avail they to answer?
Now be his course well-nigh engaged in midway of ocean,
Nor any mortal shape appears in barrens of sea-wrack.
Thus at the latest hour with insults over-sufficient
E’en to my plaints fere Fate begrudges ears that would hear me.
! Lord of All-might, Oh would in days that are bygone Jupiter
Ne’er had Cecropian poops toucht ground at Gnossian foreshore,
Nor to the unconquered Bull that tribute direful conveying
Had the false Seaman bound to Cretan island his hawser,
Nor had yon evil wight, ’neath shape the softest hard purpose
Hiding, enjoyed repose within our mansion beguested!
Whither can wend I now? What hope lends help to the lost one?
Idomenean mounts shall I scale? Ah, parted by whirlpools
Widest, yon truculent main where yields it power of passage?
Aid of my sire can I crave? Whom I willing abandoned,
Treading in tracks of a youth bewrayed with blood of a brother!
Can I console my soul with the helpful love of a helpmate
Who flies me with pliant oars, flies overbounding the sea-depths?
Nay, if this Coast I quit, this lone isle lends me no roof-tree,
Nor aught issue allows begirt by billows of Ocean:
Nowhere is path for flight: none hope shows: all things are silent:
All be a desolate waste: all makes display of destruction.
Yet never close these eyes in latest languor of dying,
Ne’er from my wearied frame go forth slow-ebbing my senses,
Ere from the Gods just doom implore I, treason-betrayed,
And with my breath supreme firm faith of Celestials invoke I.
Therefore, O you who ’venge man’s deed with penalties direful,
Eumenides! aye wont to bind with viperous hairlocks
Foreheads,—Oh, deign outspeak fierce wrath from bosom outbreathing,
Hither, Oh hither, speed, and lend you all ear to my grievance,
Which now sad I (alas!) outpour from innermost vitals
Maugre my will, sans help, blind, fired with furious madness.
And, as indeed all spring from veriest core of my bosom,
Suffer you not the cause of grief and woe to evanish;
But with the Will wherewith could Theseus leave me in loneness,
Goddesses! bid that Will lead him, lead his, to destruction.
E’en as she thus poured forth these words from anguish of bosom,
And for this cruel deed, distracted, sued she for vengeance,
Nodded the Ruler of Gods Celestial, matchless of All-might,
When at the gest earth-plain and horrid spaces of ocean
Trembled, and every sphere rockt stars and planets resplendent.
Meanwhile Theseus himself, obscured in blindness of darkness
As to his mind, dismiss’d from breast oblivious all things
Erewhile enjoined and held hereto in memory constant,
Nor for his saddened sire the gladness-signals uphoisting
Heralded safe return within sight of the Erechthean harbour.
For ’twas told of yore, when from walls of the Virginal Deess
Aegeus speeding his son, to the care of breezes committed,
Thus with a last embrace to the youth spoke words of commandment:
Son! far nearer my heart (you alone) than life of the longest,
Son, I perforce dismiss to doubtful, dangerous chances,
Lately restored to me when eld draws nearest his ending,
Since such fortune in me, and in you such boiling of valour
Tear you away from me so loath, whose eyes in their languor
Never are sated with sight of my son, all-dearest of figures.
Nor will I send you forth with joy that gladdens my bosom,
Nor will I suffer you show boon signs of favouring Fortune,
But from my soul I’ll first express an issue of sorrow,
Soiling my hoary hairs with dust and ashes commingled;
Then will I hang stained sails fast-made to the wavering yard-arms,
So shall our mourning thought and burning torture of spirit
Show by the dark sombre-dye of Iberian canvas spread.
But, grant me the grace Who dwells in Sacred Itone,
(And our issue to guard and ward the seats of Erechtheus
Sware She) that if your right is besprent with blood of the Man-Bull,
Then do you so-wise act, and stored in memory’s heart-core
Dwell these mandates of me, no time their traces untracing.
Dip, when first shall arise our hills to gladden your eye-glance,
Down from your every mast the ill-omened vestments of mourning,
Then let the twisten ropes upheave the whitest of canvas,
These seeing sans delay with joy exalting my spirit
Well shall I wot boon Time sets you returning before me.
Such were the mandates which stored at first in memory constant
Faded from Theseus’ mind like mists, compelled by the whirlwind,
Fleet from aerial crests of mountains hoary with snow-drifts.
But as the sire had sought the citadel’s summit for outlook,
Wasting his anxious eyes with tear-floods evermore flowing,
Forthright e’en as he saw the sail-gear darkened with dye-stain,
Headlong himself flung he from the sea-cliff’s pinnacled summit
Holding his Theseus lost by doom of pitiless Fortune.
Thus as he came to the home funest, his roof-tree paternal,
Theseus (vaunting the death), what dule to the maiden of Minos
Dealt with unminding mind so dree’d he similar dolour.
She too gazing in grief at the kelson vanishing slowly,
Self-wrapt, manifold cares revolved in spirit perturbed.
But from the further side came flitting bright-faced Iacchus
Girded by Satyr-crew and Nysa-reared Sileni
Burning with love unto thee (Ariadne!) and greeting thy presence.
Who flocking eager to fray did rave with infuriate spirit,
Evoe frenzying loud, with heads at Evoe rolling.
Brandisht some of the maids their thyrsi sheathed of spear-point,
Some snatcht limbs and joints of sturlings rended to pieces,
These girt necks and waists with writhing bodies of vipers,
Those with the gear enwombed in crates dark orgies ordained—
Orgies that ears profane must vainly lust for o’er hearing—
Others with palms on high smote hurried strokes on the cymbal,
Or from the polisht brass woke thin-toned tinkling music,
While from the many there boomed and blared hoarse blast of the horn-trump,
And with its horrid skirl loud shrilled the barbarous bag-pipe
Showing such varied forms, that richly-decorated couch-cloth
Folded in strait embrace the bedding drapery-veiled.
This when the Thessalan youths had eyed with eager inspection
Fulfilled, place they began to provide for venerate Godheads,
Even as Zephyrus’ breath, seas couching placid at dawn-tide,
Roughens, then stings and spurs the wavelets slantingly fretted—
Rising Aurora the while ’neath Sol the wanderer’s threshold—
Tardy at first they flow by the clement breathing of breezes
Urged, and echo the shores with soft-toned ripples of laughter,
But as the winds wax high so waves wax higher and higher,
Flashing and floating afar to outswim morn’s purpurine splendours,—
So did the crowd fare forth, the royal vestibule leaving,
And to their house each wight with vaguing paces departed.
After their wending, the first, foremost from Pelion ’s summit,
Chiron came to the front with woodland presents surcharged:
Whatso of blooms and flowers bring forth Thessalian uplands
Mighty with mountain crests, whate’er of riverine lea flowers
Reareth Favonius’ air, bud-breeding, tepidly breathing,
All in his hands brought he, unseparate in woven garlands,
Whereat laughed the house as soothed by pleasure of perfume.
Presently Péneus appears, deserting verdurous Tempe —
Tempe girt by her belts of greenwood ever impending,
Left for the Mamonides with frequent dances to worship—
Nor is he empty of hand, for bears he tallest of beeches
Deracinate, and bays with straight boles lofty and stately,
Not without nodding plane-tree nor less the flexible sister
Fire-slain Phaëton left, and not without cypresses airy.
These in a line wide-broke set he, the Mansion surrounding,
So by the soft leaves screened, the porch might flourish in verdure.
Follows hard on his track with active spirit Prometheus,
Bearing extenuate sign of penalties suffer’d in by-gones.
Paid erewhiles what time fast-bound as to every member,
Hung he in carkanet slung from the Scythian rocktor.
Last did the Father of Gods with his sacred spouse and his offspring,
Proud from the Heavens proceed, thee leaving (Phoebus) in loneness,
Lone wi’ thy sister twin who haunteth mountains of Idrus:
For that the Virgin spurned as thou the person of Peleus,
Nor Thetis’ nuptial torch would greet by act of her presence.
When they had leaned their limbs upon snowy benches reposing,
Tables largely arranged with various viands were garnisht.
But, ere opened the feast, with infirm gesture their semblance
Shaking, the Parcae fell to chaunting veridique verses.
Robed were their tremulous frames all o’er in muffle of garments
Bright-white, purple of hem enfolding heels in its edges;
Snowy the fillets that bound heads aged by many a year-tide,
And, as their wont aye was, their hands plied labour unceasing.
Each in her left upheld with soft fleece clothed a distaff,
Then did the right that drew forth thread with upturn of fingers
Gently fashion the yarn which deftly twisted by thumb-ball
Speeded the spindle poised by thread-whorl perfect of polish;
Thus as the work was wrought, the lengths were trimmed wi’ the fore-teeth,
While to their thin, dry lips stuck wool-flecks severed by biting,
Which at the first outstood from yarn-hanks evenly fine-drawn.
Still at their feet in front soft fleece-flecks white as the snow-flake
Lay in the trusty guard of wickers woven in withies.
Always a-carding the wool, with clear-toned voices resounding
Told they such lots as these in song divinely directed,
Chaunts which none after-time shall ’stablish falsehood-convicted.
O who by virtues great all highmosthonours enhancest,
Guard of Emáthia-land, most famous made by thine offspring,
Take what the Sisters deign this gladsome day to disclose thee,
Oracles soothfast told,—And ye, by Destiny followed,
Speed ye, the well-spun woof out-drawing, speed ye, O Spindles.
Soon to thy sight shall rise, their fond hopes bringing to bridegrooms,
: soon shall come thy spouse with planet auspicious, Hesperus
Who shall thy mind enbathe with a love that softens the spirit,
And as thyself shall prepare for sinking in languorous slumber,
Under thy neck robust, soft arms dispreading as pillow.
Speed ye, the well-spun woof out-drawing, speed ye, O Spindles.
Never a house like this such loves as these hath united,
Never did love conjoin by such-like covenant lovers,
As th’according tie Thetis deigned in concert wi’ Peleus.
Speed ye, the well-spun woof out-drawing, speed ye, O Spindles.
Born of yon twain shall come Achilles guiltless of fear-sense,
Known by his forceful breast and ne’er by back to the foeman,
Who shall at times full oft in doubtful contest of race-course
Conquer the fleet-foot doe with slot-tracks smoking and burning.
Speed ye, the well-spun woof out-drawing, speed ye, O Spindles.
None shall with him compare, howe’er war-doughty a hero,
Whenas the Phrygian rills flow deep with bloodshed of Teucer,
And beleaguering the walls of Troy with longest of warfare
He shall the works lay low, third heir of Pelops the perjured.
Speed ye, the well-spun woof out-drawing, speed ye, O Spindles.
His be the derring-do and deeds of valour egregious,
Often mothers shall own at funeral-rites of their children,
What time their hoary hairs from head in ashes are loosened,
And wi’ their hands infirm thay smite their bosoms loose duggèd.
Speed ye, the well-spun woof out-drawing, speed ye, O Spindles.
For as the toiling hind bestrewing denseness of corn-stalks
Under the broiling sun mows grain-fields yellow to harvest,
So shall his baneful brand strew earth with corpses of Troy-born.
Speed ye, the well-spun woof out-drawing, speed ye, O Spindles.
Aye to his valorous worth attest shall wave of Scamander
Which unto Hellè-Sea fast flowing ever dischargeth,
Straiter whose course shall grow by up-heaped barrage of corpses,
While in his depths runs warm his stream with slaughter commingled.
Speed ye, the well-spun woof out-drawing, speed ye, O Spindles.
Witness in fine shall be the victim rendered to death-stroke,
Whenas the earthern tomb on lofty tumulus builded
Shall of the stricken maid receive limbs white as the snow-flake.
Speed ye, the well-spun woof out-drawing, speed ye, O Spindles.
For when at last shall Fors to weary Achaians her fiat
Deal, of Dardanus-town to burst Neptunian fetters,
Then shall the high-reared tomb stand bathed with Polyxena’s life-blood,
Who, as the victim doomed to fall by the double-edged falchion,
Forward wi’ hams relaxt shall smite a body beheaded.
Speed ye, the well-spun woof out-drawing, speed ye, O Spindles.
Wherefore arise, ye pair, conjoin loves ardently longed-for,
Now doth the groom receive with happiest omen his goddess,
Now let the bride at length to her yearning spouse be delivered.
Speed ye, the well-spun woof out-drawing, speed ye, O Spindles.
Neither the nurse who comes at dawn to visit her nursling
E’er shall avail her neck to begird with yesterday’s ribband.
[Speed ye, the well-spun woof out-drawing, speed ye, O spindles.]
Nor shall the mother’s soul for ill-matcht daughter a-grieving
Lose by a parted couch all hopes of favourite grandsons.
Speed ye, the well-spun woof out-drawing, speed ye, O Spindles.
Thus in the bygone day Peleus’ fate foretelling
Chaunted from breasts divine prophetic verse the Parcae.
For that the pure chaste homes of heroes to visit in person
Oft-tide the Gods, and themselves to display where mortals were gathered,
Wont were the Heavenlies while none human piety spurned.
Often the Deities’ Sire, in fulgent temple a-dwelling,
Whenas in festal days received he his annual worship,
Looked upon hundreds of bulls felled prone on pavement before him.
Full oft Liber who roamed from topmost peak of Parnassus
Hunted his howling host, his Thyiads with tresses dishevelled.
Then with contending troops from all their city outflocking
Gladly the Delphians hailed their God with smoking of altars.
Often in death-full war and bravest of battle, or Mavors
Or rapid Triton’s Queen or eke the Virgin Rhamnusian,
Bevies of weaponed men exhorting, proved their presence.
But from the time when earth was stained with unspeakable scandals
And forth fro’ greeding breasts of all men justice departed,
Then did the brother drench his hands in brotherly bloodshed,
Stinted the son in heart to mourn decease of his parents,
Longèd the sire to sight his first-born’s funeral convoy
So more freely the flower of step-dame-maiden to rifle;
After that impious Queen her guiltless son underlying,
Impious, the household gods with crime ne’er dreading to sully—
All things fair and nefand being mixt in fury of evil
Turned from ourselves avert the great goodwill of the Godheads.
Wherefor they nowise deign our human assemblies to visit,
Nor do they suffer themselves be met in light of the day-tide.
